A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
NINAREH MEHRABI, FRED MORSTATTER, NRIPSUTA SAXENA,
KRISTINA LERMAN, and ARAM GALSTYAN, USC-ISI
With the widespread use of artificial intelligence (AI) systems and applications in our everyday lives, accounting
for fairness has gained significant importance in designing and engineering of such systems. AI systems can be
used in many sensitive environments to make important and life-changing decisions; thus, it is crucial to ensure
that these decisions do not reflect discriminatory behavior toward certain groups or populations. More recently
some work has been developed in traditional machine learning and deep learning that address such challenges in
different subdomains. With the commercialization of these systems, researchers are becoming more aware of
the biases that these applications can contain and are attempting to address them. In this survey we investigated
different real-world applications that have shown biases in various ways, and we listed different sources of
biases that can affect AI applications. We then created a taxonomy for fairness definitions that machine learning
researchers have defined in order to avoid the existing bias in AI systems. In addition to that, we examined
different domains and subdomains in AI showing what researchers have observed with regard to unfair outcomes
in the state-of-the-art methods and ways they have tried to address them. There are still many future directions
and solutions that can be taken to mitigate the problem of bias in AI systems. We are hoping that this survey will
motivate researchers to tackle these issues in the near future by observing existing work in their respective fields.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Artificial intelligence; Philosophical/theoretical founda-
tions of artificial intelligence;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Fairness and Bias in Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Deep
Learning, Natural Language Processing, Representation Learning
1
INTRODUCTION
Machine learning algorithms have penetrated every aspect of our lives. Algorithms make movie
recommendations, suggest products to buy, and who to date. They are increasingly used in high-stakes
scenarios such as loans [113] and hiring decisions [19, 39]. There are clear benefits to algorithmic
decision-making; unlike people, machines do not become tired or bored [45, 119], and can take into
account orders of magnitude more factors than people can. However, like people, algorithms are
vulnerable to biases that render their decisions “unfair” [6, 121]. In the context of decision-making,
fairness is the absence of any prejudice or favoritism toward an individual or group based on
their inherent or acquired characteristics. Thus, an unfair algorithm is one whose decisions are
skewed toward a particular group of people. A canonical example comes from a tool used by courts
in the United States to make pretrial detention and release decisions. The software, Correctional
Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions (COMPAS), measures the risk of a person
to recommit another crime. Judges use COMPAS to decide whether to release an offender, or to keep
him or her in prison. An investigation into the software found a bias against African-Americans:1
1https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing
Authors’ address: USC, Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 1001 Marina del Rey, CA 90292
This material is based upon work supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under Agreement
No. HR0011890019.
arXiv:1908.09635v3  [cs.LG]  25 Jan 2022
2
Mehrabi et al.
COMPAS is more likely to have higher false positive rates for African-American offenders than
Caucasian offenders in falsely predicting them to be at a higher risk of recommitting a crime or
recidivism. Similar findings have been made in other areas, such as an AI system that judges beauty
pageant winners but was biased against darker-skinned contestants,2 or facial recognition software in
digital cameras that overpredicts Asians as blinking.3 These biased predictions stem from the hidden
or neglected biases in data or algorithms.
In this survey we identify two potential sources of unfairness in machine learning outcomes—
those that arise from biases in the data and those that arise from the algorithms. We review research
investigating how biases in data skew what is learned by machine learning algorithms, and nuances
in the way the algorithms themselves work to prevent them from making fair decisions—even when
the data is unbiased. Furthermore, we observe that biased algorithmic outcomes might impact user
experience, thus generating a feedback loop between data, algorithms and users that can perpetuate
and even amplify existing sources of bias.
We begin the review with several highly visible real-world cases of where unfair machine learning
algorithms have led to suboptimal and discriminatory outcomes in Section 2. In Section 3, we
describe the different types and sources of biases that occur within the data-algorithms-users loop
mentioned above. Next, in Section 4, we present the different ways that the concept of fairness has
been operationalized and studied in the literature. We discuss the ways in which these two concepts
are coupled. Last, we will focus on different families of machine learning approaches, how fairness
manifests differently in each one, and the current state-of-the-art for tackling them in Section 5,
followed by potential areas of future work in each of the domains in Section 6.
2
REAL-WORLD EXAMPLES OF ALGORITHMIC UNFAIRNESS
With the popularity of AI and machine learning over the past decades, and their prolific spread in
different applications, safety and fairness constraints have become a significant issue for researchers
and engineers. Machine learning is used in courts to assess the probability that a defendant recommits
a crime. It is used in different medical fields, in childhood welfare systems [35], and autonomous
vehicles. All of these applications have a direct effect in our lives and can harm our society if not
designed and engineered correctly, that is with considerations to fairness. [123] has a list of the
applications and the ways these AI systems affect our daily lives with their inherent biases, such as
the existence of bias in AI chatbots, employment matching, flight routing, and automated legal aid for
immigration algorithms, and search and advertising placement algorithms. [67] discusses examples
of how bias in the real world can creep into AI and robotic systems, such as bias in face recognition
applications, voice recognition, and search engines. Therefore, it is important for researchers and
engineers to be concerned about the downstream applications and their potential harmful effects
when modeling an algorithm or a system.
2.1
Systems that Demonstrate Discrimination
COMPAS is an exemplar of a discriminatory system. In addition to this, discriminatory behavior was
also evident in an algorithm that would deliver advertisements promoting jobs in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) fields [88]. This advertisement was designed to deliver advertise-
ments in a gender-neutral way. However, less women compared to men saw the advertisement due to
gender-imbalance which would result in younger women being considered as a valuable subgroup
and more expensive to show advertisements to. This optimization algorithm would deliver ads in
a discriminatory way although its original and pure intention was to be gender-neutral. Bias in
2https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/artificial-intelligence-beauty-contest-doesnt-like-black-people
3http://content.time.com/time/business/article/0,8599,1954643,00.html
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
3
facial recognition systems [128] and recommender systems [140] have also been largely studied and
evaluated and in many cases shown to be discriminative towards certain populations and subgroups.
In order to be able to address the bias issue in these applications, it is important for us to know where
these biases are coming from and what we can do to prevent them.
We have enumerated the bias in COMPAS, which is a widely used commercial risk assessment
software. In addition to its bias, it also contains performance issues when compared to humans. When
compared to non-expert human judgment in a study, it was discovered to be not any better than a
normal human [46]. It is also interesting to note that although COMPAS uses 137 features, only 7 of
those were presented to the people in the study. [46] further argues that COMPAS is not any better
than a simple logistic regression model when making decisions. We should think responsibly, and
recognize that the application of these tools, and their subsequent decisions affect peoples’ lives;
therefore, considering fairness constraints is a crucial task while designing and engineering these
types of sensitive tools. In another similar study, while investigating sources of group unfairness
(unfairness across different groups is defined later), the authors in [145] compared SAVRY, a tool
used in risk assessment frameworks that includes human intervention in its process, with automatic
machine learning methods in order to see which one is more accurate and more fair. Conducting
these types of studies should be done more frequently, but prior to releasing the tools in order to
avoid doing harm.
2.2
Assessment Tools
An interesting direction that researchers have taken is introducing tools that can assess the amount
of fairness in a tool or system. For example, Aequitas [136] is a toolkit that lets users to test
models with regards to several bias and fairness metrics for different population subgroups. Aequitas
produces reports from the obtained data that helps data scientists, machine learning researchers, and
policymakers to make conscious decisions and avoid harm and damage toward certain populations.
AI Fairness 360 (AIF360) is another toolkit developed by IBM in order to help moving fairness
research algorithms into an industrial setting and to create a benchmark for fairness algorithms to
get evaluated and an environment for fairness researchers to share their ideas [11]. These types of
toolkits can be helpful for learners, researchers, and people working in the industry to move towards
developing fair machine learning application away from discriminatory behavior.
3
BIAS IN DATA, ALGORITHMS, AND USER EXPERIENCES
Most AI systems and algorithms are data driven and require data upon which to be trained. Thus,
data is tightly coupled to the functionality of these algorithms and systems. In the cases where the
underlying training data contains biases, the algorithms trained on them will learn these biases and
reflect them into their predictions. As a result, existing biases in data can affect the algorithms using
the data, producing biased outcomes. Algorithms can even amplify and perpetuate existing biases
in the data. In addition, algorithms themselves can display biased behavior due to certain design
choices, even if the data itself is not biased. The outcomes of these biased algorithms can then be fed
into real-world systems and affect users’ decisions, which will result in more biased data for training
future algorithms. For example, imagine a web search engine that puts specific results at the top of
its list. Users tend to interact most with the top results and pay little attention to those further down
the list [92]. The interactions of users with items will then be collected by the web search engine,
and the data will be used to make future decisions on how information should be presented based
on popularity and user interest. As a result, results at the top will become more and more popular,
not because of the nature of the result but due to the biased interaction and placement of results by
these algorithms [92]. The loop capturing this feedback between biases in data, algorithms, and user
4
Mehrabi et al.
Data
Algorithm
User 
Interaction
Behavioral Bias
Content Production Bias
Ranking Bias
Emergent Bias
Aggregation Bias
Longitudinal Data Fallacy
Fig. 1. Examples of bias definitions placed in the data, algorithm, and user interaction feedback loop.
interaction is illustrated in Figure 1. We use this loop to categorize definitions of bias in the section
below.
3.1
Types of Bias
Bias can exist in many shapes and forms, some of which can lead to unfairness in different down-
stream learning tasks. In [144], authors talk about sources of bias in machine learning with their
categorizations and descriptions in order to motivate future solutions to each of the sources of bias
introduced in the paper. In [120], the authors prepare a complete list of different types of biases with
their corresponding definitions that exist in different cycles from data origins to its collection and its
processing. Here we will reiterate the most important sources of bias introduced in these two papers
and also add in some work from other existing research papers. Additionally, we will introduce a
different categorization of these definitions in the paper according to the data, algorithm, and user
interaction loop.
3.1.1
Data to Algorithm. In this section we talk about biases in data, which, when used by ML
training algorithms, might result in biased algorithmic outcomes.
(1) Measurement Bias. Measurement, or reporting, bias arises from how we choose, utilize,
and measure particular features [144]. An example of this type of bias was observed in the
recidivism risk prediction tool COMPAS, where prior arrests and friend/family arrests were
used as proxy variables to measure level of “riskiness” or “crime”—-which on its own can
be viewed as mismeasured proxies. This is partly due to the fact that minority communities
are controlled and policed more frequently, so they have higher arrest rates. However, one
should not conclude that because people coming from minority groups have higher arrest rates
therefore they are more dangerous as there is a difference in how these groups are assessed
and controlled [144].
(2) Omitted Variable Bias. Omitted variable bias4 occurs when one or more important variables
are left out of the model [38, 114, 131]. An example for this case would be when someone
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
5
designs a model to predict, with relatively high accuracy, the annual percentage rate at which
customers will stop subscribing to a service, but soon observes that the majority of users are
canceling their subscription without receiving any warning from the designed model. Now
imagine that the reason for canceling the subscriptions is appearance of a new strong competitor
in the market which offers the same solution, but for half the price. The appearance of the
competitor was something that the model was not ready for; therefore, it is considered to be an
omitted variable.
(3) Representation Bias. Representation bias arises from how we sample from a population
during data collection process [144]. Non-representative samples lack the diversity of the
population, with missing subgroups and other anomalies. Lack of geographical diversity in
datasets like ImageNet (as shown in Figures 3 and 4) results in demonstrable bias towards
Western cultures.
(4) Aggregation Bias. Aggregation bias (or ecological fallacy) arises when false conclusions are
drawn about individuals from observing the entire population. An example of this type of
bias can be seen in clinical aid tools. Consider diabetes patients who have apparent morbidity
differences across ethnicities and genders. Specifically, HbA1c levels, that are widely used
to diagnose and monitor diabetes, differ in complex ways across genders and ethnicities.
Therefore, a model that ignores individual differences will likely not be well-suited for all
ethnic and gender groups in the population [144]. This is true even when they are represented
equally in the training data. Any general assumptions about subgroups within the population
can result in aggregation bias.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
x1
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
y
Multivariate Linear Regression
Clusterwise Linear Regression
Cluster Regression
Data
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
x1
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
y
Multivariate Linear Regression
Clusterwise Linear Regression
Cluster Regression
Data
Fig. 2. Illustration of biases in data. The red line shows the regression (MLR) for the entire population,
while dashed green lines are regressions for each subgroup, and the solid green line is the unbiased
regression. (a) When all subgroups are of equal size, then MLR shows a positive relationship between
the outcome and the independent variable. (b) Regression shows almost no relationship in less
balanced data. The relationships between variables within each subgroup, however, remain the same.
(Credit: Nazanin Alipourfard)
(a) Simpson’s Paradox. Simpson’s paradox is a type of aggregation bias that arises in the
analysis of heterogeneous data [18]. The paradox arises when an association observed
in aggregated data disappears or reverses when the same data is disaggregated into its
underlying subgroups (Fig. 2(a)). One of the better-known examples of the type of paradox
arose during the gender bias lawsuit in university admissions against UC Berkeley [16]. After
analyzing graduate school admissions data, it seemed like there was bias toward women,
a smaller fraction of whom were being admitted to graduate programs compared to their
male counterparts. However, when admissions data was separated and analyzed over the
departments, women applicants had equality and in some cases even a small advantage
6
Mehrabi et al.
Fig. 3. Fraction of each country, represented by their two-letter ISO codes, in Open Images and
ImageNet image datasets. In both datasets, US and Great Britain represent the top locations, from
[142] © Shreya Shankar.
Fig. 4. Geographic distribution of countries in the Open Images data set. In their sample, almost one
third of the data was US-based, and 60% of the data was from the six most represented countries
across North America and Europe, from [142] © Shreya Shankar.
over men. The paradox happened as women tended to apply to departments with lower
admission rates for both genders. Simpson’s paradox has been observed in a variety of
domains, including biology [37], psychology [81], astronomy [109], and computational
social science [91].
(b) Modifiable Areal Unit Problem is a statistical bias in geospatial analysis, which arises
when modeling data at different levels of spatial aggregation [56]. This bias results in
different trends learned when data is aggregated at different spatial scales.
(5) Sampling Bias. Sampling bias is similar to representation bias, and it arises due to non-
random sampling of subgroups. As a consequence of sampling bias, the trends estimated for
one population may not generalize to data collected from a new population. For the intuition,
consider the example in Figure 2. The left plot represents data collected during a study from
three subgroups, which were uniformly sampled (Fig. 2(a)). Suppose the next time the study
was conducted, one of the subgroups was sampled more frequently than the rest (Fig. 2(b)). The
positive trend found by the regression model in the first study almost completely disappears
(solid red line in plot on the right), although the subgroup trends (dashed green lines) are
unaffected.
(6) Longitudinal Data Fallacy. Researchers analyzing temporal data must use longitudinal anal-
ysis to track cohorts over time to learn their behavior. Instead, temporal data is often modeled
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
7
using cross-sectional analysis, which combines diverse cohorts at a single time point. The
heterogeneous cohorts can bias cross-sectional analysis, leading to different conclusions than
longitudinal analysis. As an example, analysis of bulk Reddit data [10] revealed that comment
length decreased over time on average. However, bulk data represented a cross-sectional
snapshot of the population, which in reality contained different cohorts who joined Reddit
in different years. When data was disaggregated by cohorts, the comment length within each
cohort was found to increase over time.
(7) Linking Bias. Linking bias arises when network attributes obtained from user connections,
activities, or interactions differ and misrepresent the true behavior of the users [120]. In
[104] authors show how social networks can be biased toward low-degree nodes when only
considering the links in the network and not considering the content and behavior of users in
the network. [153] also shows that user interactions are significantly different from social link
patterns that are based on features, such as method of interaction or time. The differences and
biases in the networks can be a result of many factors, such as network sampling, as shown in
[59, 111], which can change the network measures and cause different types of problems.
3.1.2
Algorithm to User. Algorithms modulate user behavior. Any biases in algorithms might
introduce biases in user behavior. In this section we talk about biases that are as a result of algorithmic
outcomes and affect user behavior as a consequence.
(1) Algorithmic Bias. Algorithmic bias is when the bias is not present in the input data and is
added purely by the algorithm [9]. The algorithmic design choices, such as use of certain
optimization functions, regularizations, choices in applying regression models on the data as
a whole or considering subgroups, and the general use of statistically biased estimators in
algorithms [44], can all contribute to biased algorithmic decisions that can bias the outcome of
the algorithms.
(2) User Interaction Bias. User Interaction bias is a type of bias that can not only be observant
on the Web but also get triggered from two sources—the user interface and through the user
itself by imposing his/her self-selected biased behavior and interaction [9]. This type of bias
can be influenced by other types and subtypes, such as presentation and ranking biases.
(a) Presentation Bias. Presentation bias is a result of how information is presented [9]. For
example, on the Web users can only click on content that they see, so the seen content gets
clicks, while everything else gets no click. And it could be the case that the user does not see
all the information on the Web [9].
(b) Ranking Bias. The idea that top-ranked results are the most relevant and important will
result in attraction of more clicks than others. This bias affects search engines [9] and
crowdsourcing applications [93].
(3) Popularity Bias. Items that are more popular tend to be exposed more. However, popularity
metrics are subject to manipulation—for example, by fake reviews or social bots [117]. As an
instance, this type of bias can be seen in search engines [71, 117] or recommendation systems
where popular objects would be presented more to the public. But this presentation may not be
a result of good quality; instead, it may be due to other biased factors.
(4) Emergent Bias. Emergent bias occurs as a result of use and interaction with real users. This
bias arises as a result of change in population, cultural values, or societal knowledge usually
some time after the completion of design [53]. This type of bias is more likely to be observed
in user interfaces, since interfaces tend to reflect the capacities, characteristics, and habits of
prospective users by design [53]. This type of bias can itself be divided into more subtypes, as
discussed in detail in [53].
8
Mehrabi et al.
(5) Evaluation Bias. Evaluation bias happens during model evaluation [144]. This includes the
use of inappropriate and disproportionate benchmarks for evaluation of applications such
as Adience and IJB-A benchmarks. These benchmarks are used in the evaluation of facial
recognition systems that were biased toward skin color and gender [24], and can serve as
examples for this type of bias [144].
3.1.3
User to Data. Many data sources used for training ML models are user-generated. Any
inherent biases in users might be reflected in the data they generate. Furthermore, when user behavior
is affected/modulated by an algorithm, any biases present in those algorithm might introduce bias in
the data generation process. Here we list several important types of such biases.
(1) Historical Bias. Historical bias is the already existing bias and socio-technical issues in the
world and can seep into from the data generation process even given a perfect sampling and
feature selection [144]. An example of this type of bias can be found in a 2018 image search
result where searching for women CEOs ultimately resulted in fewer female CEO images due
to the fact that only 5% of Fortune 500 CEOs were woman—which would cause the search
results to be biased towards male CEOs [144]. These search results were of course reflecting
the reality, but whether or not the search algorithms should reflect this reality is an issue worth
considering.
(2) Population Bias. Population bias arises when statistics, demographics, representatives, and
user characteristics are different in the user population of the platform from the original target
population [120]. Population bias creates non-representative data. An example of this type of
bias can arise from different user demographics on different social platforms, such as women
being more likely to use Pinterest, Facebook, Instagram, while men being more active in online
forums like Reddit or Twitter. More such examples and statistics related to social media use
among young adults according to gender, race, ethnicity, and parental educational background
can be found in [64].
(3) Self-Selection Bias. Self-selection bias4 is a subtype of the selection or sampling bias in which
subjects of the research select themselves. An example of this type of bias can be observed in
an opinion poll to measure enthusiasm for a political candidate, where the most enthusiastic
supporters are more likely to complete the poll.
(4) Social Bias. Social bias happens when others’ actions affect our judgment. [9]. An example
of this type of bias can be a case where we want to rate or review an item with a low score, but
when influenced by other high ratings, we change our scoring thinking that perhaps we are
being too harsh [9, 151].
(5) Behavioral Bias. Behavioral bias arises from different user behavior across platforms, con-
texts, or different datasets [120]. An example of this type of bias can be observed in [108],
where authors show how differences in emoji representations among platforms can result in
different reactions and behavior from people and sometimes even leading to communication
errors.
(6) Temporal Bias. Temporal bias arises from differences in populations and behaviors over time
[120]. An example can be observed in Twitter where people talking about a particular topic
start using a hashtag at some point to capture attention, then continue the discussion about the
event without using the hashtag [120, 146].
(7) Content Production Bias. Content Production bias arises from structural, lexical, semantic,
and syntactic differences in the contents generated by users [120]. An example of this type of
bias can be seen in [118] where the differences in use of language across different gender and
4https://data36.com/statistical-bias-types-explained/
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
9
age groups is discussed. The differences in use of language can also be seen across and within
countries and populations.
Existing work tries to categorize these bias definitions into groups, such as definitions falling solely
under data or user interaction. However, due to the existence of the feedback loop phenomenon [36],
these definitions are intertwined, and we need a categorization which closely models this situation.
This feedback loop is not only existent between the data and the algorithm, but also between the
algorithms and user interaction [29]. Inspired by these papers, we modeled categorization of bias
definitions, as shown in Figure 1, and grouped these definitions on the arrows of the loop where we
thought they were most effective. We emphasize the fact again that these definitions are intertwined,
and one should consider how they affect each other in this cycle, and address them accordingly.
3.2
Data Bias Examples
There are multiple ways that discriminatory bias can seep into data. For instance, using unbalanced
data can create biases against underrepresented groups. [170] analyzes some examples of the biases
that can exist in the data and algorithms and offer some recommendations and suggestions toward
mitigating these issues.
3.2.1
Examples of Bias in Machine Learning Data. In [24], the authors show that datasets like
IJB-A and Adience are imbalanced and contain mainly light-skinned subjects—79.6% in IJB-A and
86.2% in Adience. This can bias the analysis towards dark-skinned groups who are underrepresented
in the data. In another instance, the way we use and analyze our data can create bias when we do not
consider different subgroups in the data. In [24], the authors also show that considering only male-
female groups is not enough, but there is also a need to use race to further subdivide the gender groups
into light-skinned females, light-skinned males, dark-skinned males, and dark-skinned females. It’s
only in this case that we can clearly observe the bias towards dark-skinned females, as previously
dark-skinned males would compromise for dark-skinned females and would hide the underlying
bias towards this subgroup. Popular machine-learning datasets that serve as a base for most of
the developed algorithms and tools can also be biased—which can be harmful to the downstream
applications that are based on these datasets. For instance, ImageNet [135] and Open Images [86] are
two widely used datasets in machine-learning. In [142], researchers showed that these datasets suffer
from representation bias and advocate for the need to incorporate geographic diversity and inclusion
while creating such datasets. In addition, authors in [105] write about the existing representational
biases in different knowledge bases that are widely used in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
applications for different commonsense reasoning tasks.
3.2.2
Examples of Data Bias in Medical Applications. These data biases can be more dangerous
in other sensitive applications. For example, in medical domains there are many instances in which
the data studied and used are skewed toward certain populations—which can have dangerous conse-
quences for the underrepresented communities. [98] showed how exclusion of African-Americans
resulted in their misclassification in clinical studies, so they became advocates for sequencing the
genomes of diverse populations in the data to prevent harm to underrepresented populations. Authors
in [143] studied the 23andMe genotype dataset and found that out of 2,399 individuals, who have
openly shared their genotypes in public repositories, 2,098 (87%) are European, while only 58
(2%) are Asian and 50 (2%) African. Other such studies were conducted in [54] which states that
UK Biobank, a large and widely used genetic dataset, may not represent the sampling population.
Researchers found evidence of a “healthy volunteer” selection bias. [150] has other examples of
studies on existing biases in the data used in the medical domain. [157] also looks at machine-learning
10
Mehrabi et al.
algorithms and data utilized in medical fields, and writes about how artificial intelligence in health
care has not impacted all patients equally.
3.3
Discrimination
Similar to bias, discrimination is also a source of unfairness. Discrimination can be considered as a
source for unfairness that is due to human prejudice and stereotyping based on the sensitive attributes,
which may happen intentionally or unintentionally, while bias can be considered as a source for
unfairness that is due to the data collection, sampling, and measurement. Although bias can also be
seen as a source of unfairness that is due to human prejudice and stereotyping, in the algorithmic
fairness literature it is more intuitive to categorize them as such according to the existing research
in these areas. In this survey, we mainly focus on concepts that are relevant to algorithmic fairness
issues. [99, 133, 152] contain more broad information on discrimination theory that involve more
multidisciplinary concepts from legal theory, economics, and social sciences which can be referenced
by the interested readers.
3.3.1
Explainable Discrimination. Differences in treatment and outcomes amongst different
groups can be justified and explained via some attributes in some cases. In situations where these
differences are justified and explained, it is not considered to be illegal discrimination and hence
called explainable [77]. For instance, authors in [77] state that in the UCI Adult dataset [7], a widely
used dataset in the fairness domain, males on average have a higher annual income than females.
However, this is because on average females work fewer hours than males per week. Work hours
per week is an attribute that can be used to explain low income which needs to be considered. If we
make decisions, without considering working hours, such that males and females end up averaging
the same income, we will lead to reverse discrimination since we would cause male employees to get
lower salary than females. Therefore, explainable discrimination is acceptable and legal as it can
be explained through other attributes like working hours. In [77], authors present a methodology
to quantify the explainable and illegal discrimination in data. They argue that methods that do not
take the explainable part of the discrimination into account may result in non-desirable outcomes, so
they introduce a reverse discrimination which is equally harmful and undesirable. They explain how
to quantify and measure discrimination in data or a classifier’s decisions which directly considers
illegal and explainable discrimination.
3.3.2
Unexplainable Discrimination. In contrast to explainable discrimination, there is unexplain-
able discrimination in which the discrimination toward a group is unjustified and therefore considered
illegal. Authors in [77] also present local techniques for removing only the illegal or unexplainable
discrimination, allowing only for explainable differences in decisions. These are preprocessing tech-
niques that change the training data such that it contains no unexplainable discrimination. We expect
classifiers trained on this preprocessed data to not capture illegal or unexplainable discrimination.
Unexplainable discrimination consists of direct and indirect discrimination.
(1) Direct Discrimination. Direct discrimination happens when protected attributes of individuals
explicitly result in non-favorable outcomes toward them [164]. Typically, there are some traits
identified by law on which it is illegal to discriminate against, and it is usually these traits that
are considered to be “protected” or “sensitive” attributes in computer science literature. A list
of some of these protected attributes is provided in Table 3 as specified in the Fair Housing
and Equal Credit Opportunity Acts (FHA and ECOA) [30].
(2) Indirect Discrimination. In indirect discrimination, individuals appear to be treated based
on seemingly neutral and non-protected attributes; however, protected groups, or individuals
still get to be treated unjustly as a result of implicit effects from their protected attributes (e.g.,
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
11
the residential zip code of a person can be used in decision making processes such as loan
applications. However, this can still lead to racial discrimination, such as redlining, as despite
the fact that zip code appears to be a non-sensitive attribute, it may correlate with race because
of the population of residential areas.) [130, 164].
3.3.3
Sources of Discrimination.
(1) Systemic Discrimination. Systemic discrimination refers to policies, customs, or behaviors
that are a part of the culture or structure of an organization that may perpetuate discrimination
against certain subgroups of the population [40]. [132] found that employers overwhelmingly
preferred competent candidates that were culturally similar to them, and shared similar ex-
periences and hobbies. If the decision-makers happen to belong overwhelmingly to certain
subgroups, this may result in discrimination against competent candidates that do not belong
to these subgroups.
(2) Statistical Discrimination. Statistical discrimination is a phenomenon where decision-makers
use average group statistics to judge an individual belonging to that group. It usually occurs
when the decision-makers (e.g., employers, or law enforcement officers) use an individual’s
obvious, recognizable characteristics as a proxy for either hidden or more-difficult-to-determine
characteristics, that may actually be relevant to the outcome [124].
4
ALGORITHMIC FAIRNESS
Fighting against bias and discrimination has a long history in philosophy and psychology, and
recently in machine-learning. However, in order to be able to fight against discrimination and achieve
fairness, one should first define fairness. Philosophy and psychology have tried to define the concept
of fairness long before computer science. The fact that no universal definition of fairness exists shows
the difficulty of solving this problem [138]. Different preferences and outlooks in different cultures
lend a preference to different ways of looking at fairness, which makes it harder to come up with just
a single definition that is acceptable to everyone in a situation. Indeed, even in computer science,
where most of the work on proposing new fairness constraints for algorithms has come from the
West, and a lot of these papers use the same datasets and problems to show how their constraints
perform, there is still no clear agreement on which constraints are the most appropriate for those
problems. Broadly, fairness is the absence of any prejudice or favoritism towards an individual or a
group based on their intrinsic or acquired traits in the context of decision-making [139]. Even though
fairness is an incredibly desirable quality in society, it can be surprisingly difficult to achieve in
practice. With these challenges in mind, many fairness definitions are proposed to address different
algorithmic bias and discrimination issues discussed in the previous section.
4.1
Definitions of Fairness
In [17], authors studied fairness definitions in political philosophy and tried to tie them to machine-
learning. Authors in [70] studied the 50-year history of fairness definitions in the areas of education
and machine-learning. In [149], authors listed and explained some of the definitions used for fairness
in algorithmic classification problems. In [139], authors studied the general public’s perception of
some of these fairness definitions in computer science literature. Here we will reiterate and provide
some of the most widely used definitions, along with their explanations inspired from [149].
Definition 1. (Equalized Odds). The definition of equalized odds, provided by [63], states that
“A predictor ˆY satisfies equalized odds with respect to protected attribute A and outcome Y, if ˆY and A
are independent conditional on Y. P( ˆY=1|A=0,Y =y) = P( ˆY=1|A=1,Y =y) , y∈{0,1}”. This means
that the probability of a person in the positive class being correctly assigned a positive outcome
12
Mehrabi et al.
and the probability of a person in a negative class being incorrectly assigned a positive outcome
should both be the same for the protected and unprotected group members [149]. In other words, the
equalized odds definition states that the protected and unprotected groups should have equal rates for
true positives and false positives.
Definition 2. (Equal Opportunity). “A binary predictor ˆY satisfies equal opportunity with respect
to A and Y if P( ˆY=1|A=0,Y=1) = P( ˆY=1|A=1,Y=1)” [63]. This means that the probability of a
person in a positive class being assigned to a positive outcome should be equal for both protected
and unprotected (female and male) group members [149]. In other words, the equal opportunity
definition states that the protected and unprotected groups should have equal true positive rates.
Definition 3. (Demographic Parity). Also known as statistical parity. “A predictor ˆY satisfies demo-
graphic parity if P( ˆY |A = 0) = P( ˆY|A = 1)” [48, 87]. The likelihood of a positive outcome [149]
should be the same regardless of whether the person is in the protected (e.g., female) group.
Definition 4. (Fairness Through Awareness). “An algorithm is fair if it gives similar predictions to
similar individuals” [48, 87]. In other words, any two individuals who are similar with respect to a
similarity (inverse distance) metric defined for a particular task should receive a similar outcome.
Definition 5. (Fairness Through Unawareness). “An algorithm is fair as long as any protected
attributes A are not explicitly used in the decision-making process” [61, 87].
Definition 6. (Treatment Equality). “Treatment equality is achieved when the ratio of false negatives
and false positives is the same for both protected group categories” [15].
Definition 7. (Test Fairness). “A score S = S(x) is test fair (well-calibrated) if it reflects the same
likelihood of recidivism irrespective of the individual’s group membership, R. That is, if for all values
of s, P(Y =1|S=s,R=b)=P(Y =1|S=s,R=w)” [34]. In other words, the test fairness definition states
that for any predicted probability score S, people in both protected and unprotected groups must have
equal probability of correctly belonging to the positive class [149].
Definition 8. (Counterfactual Fairness). “Predictor ˆY is counterfactually fair if under any con-
text X =x and A=a, P( ˆ𝑌𝐴←−𝑎(U)=y|X =x,A=a)=P( ˆ𝑌𝐴←−𝑎′(U)=y|X =x,A=a), (for all y and for any
value 𝑎′ attainable by A” [87]. The counterfactual fairness definition is based on the “intuition that a
decision is fair towards an individual if it is the same in both the actual world and a counterfactual
world where the individual belonged to a different demographic group.”
Definition 9. (Fairness in Relational Domains). “A notion of fairness that is able to capture the
relational structure in a domain—not only by taking attributes of individuals into consideration but
by taking into account the social, organizational, and other connections between individuals” [50].
Definition 10. (Conditional Statistical Parity). For a set of legitimate factors L, predictor ˆY satisfies
conditional statistical parity if P( ˆY |L=1,A = 0) = P( ˆY|L=1,A = 1) [41]. Conditional statistical parity
states that people in both protected and unprotected (female and male) groups should have equal
probability of being assigned to a positive outcome given a set of legitimate factors L [149].
Fairness definitions fall under different types as follows:
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
13
Name
Reference
Group
Subgroup
Individual
Demographic parity
[87][48]
✓
Conditional statistical parity
[41]
✓
Equalized odds
[63]
✓
Equal opportunity
[63]
✓
Treatment equality
[15]
✓
Test fairness
[34]
✓
Subgroup fairness
[79][80]
✓
Fairness through unawareness
[87][61]
✓
Fairness through awareness
[48]
✓
Counterfactual fairness
[87]
✓
Table 1. Categorizing different fairness notions into group, subgroup, and individual types.
(1) Individual Fairness. Give similar predictions to similar individuals [48, 87].
(2) Group Fairness. Treat different groups equally [48, 87].
(3) Subgroup Fairness. Subgroup fairness intends to obtain the best properties of the group and
individual notions of fairness. It is different than these notions but uses them in order to obtain
better outcomes. It picks a group fairness constraint like equalizing false positive and asks
whether this constraint holds over a large collection of subgroups [79, 80].
It is important to note that according to [83], it is impossible to satisfy some of the fairness con-
straints at once except in highly constrained special cases. In [83], the authors show the inherent
incompatibility of two conditions: calibration and balancing the positive and negative classes. These
cannot be satisfied simultaneously with each other unless under certain constraints; therefore, it
is important to take the context and application in which fairness definitions need to be used into
consideration and use them accordingly [141]. Another important aspect to consider is time and
temporal analysis of the impacts that these definitions may have on individuals or groups. In [95]
authors show that current fairness definitions are not always helpful and do not promote improvement
for sensitive groups—and can actually be harmful when analyzed over time in some cases. They
also show that measurement errors can also act in favor of these fairness definitions; therefore, they
show how temporal modeling and measurement are important in evaluation of fairness criteria and
introduce a new range of trade-offs and challenges toward this direction. It is also important to pay
attention to the sources of bias and their types when trying to solve fairness-related questions.
5
METHODS FOR FAIR MACHINE LEARNING
There have been numerous attempts to address bias in artificial intelligence in order to achieve
fairness; these stem from domains of AI. In this section we will enumerate different domains of
AI, and the work that has been produced by each community to combat bias and unfairness in their
methods. Table 2 provides an overview of the different areas that we focus upon in this survey.
While this section is largely domain-specific, it can be useful to take a cross-domain view. Gener-
ally, methods that target biases in the algorithms fall under three categories:
(1) Pre-processing. Pre-processing techniques try to transform the data so that the underlying
discrimination is removed [43]. If the algorithm is allowed to modify the training data, then
pre-processing can be used [11].
(2) In-processing. In-processing techniques try to modify and change state-of-the-art learning
algorithms in order to remove discrimination during the model training process [43]. If it is
14
Mehrabi et al.
allowed to change the learning procedure for a machine learning model, then in-processing
can be used during the training of a model— either by incorporating changes into the objective
function or imposing a constraint [11, 14].
(3) Post-processing. Post-processing is performed after training by accessing a holdout set which
was not involved during the training of the model [43]. If the algorithm can only treat the
learned model as a black box without any ability to modify the training data or learning
algorithm, then only post-processing can be used in which the labels assigned by the black-box
model initially get reassigned based on a function during the post-processing phase [11, 14].
Examples of some existing work and their categorization into these types is shown in Table 4. These
methods are not just limited to general machine learning techniques, but because of AI’s popularity,
they have expanded to different domains such as natural language processing and deep learning. From
learning fair representations [42, 97, 112] to learning fair word embeddings [20, 58, 169], debiasing
methods have been proposed in different AI applications and domains. Most of these methods try
to avoid unethical interference of sensitive or protected attributes into the decision-making process,
while others target exclusion bias by trying to include users from sensitive groups. In addition, some
works try to satisfy one or more of the fairness notions in their methods, such as disparate learning
processes (DLPs) which try to satisfy notions of treatment disparity and impact disparity by allowing
the protected attributes during the training phase but avoiding them during prediction time [94]. A
list of protected or sensitive attributes is provided in Table 3. They point out what attributes should
not affect the outcome of the decision in housing loan or credit card decision-making [30] according
to the law. Some of the existing work tries to treat sensitive attributes as noise to disregard their
effect on decision-making, while some causal methods use causal graphs, and disregard some paths
in the causal graph that result in sensitive attributes affecting the outcome of the decision. Different
bias-mitigating methods and techniques are discussed below for different domains—each targeting a
different problem in different areas of machine learning in detail. This can expand the horizon of
the reader on where and how bias can affect the system and try to help researchers carefully look
at various new problems concerning potential places where discrimination and bias can affect the
outcome of a system.
5.1
Unbiasing Data
Every dataset is the result of several design decisions made by the data curator. Those decisions have
consequences for the fairness of the resulting dataset, which in turn affects the resulting algorithms. In
order to mitigate the effects of bias in data, some general methods have been proposed that advocate
having good practices while using data, such as having datasheets that would act like a supporting
document for the data reporting the dataset creation method, its characteristics, motivations, and its
skews [13, 55]. [12] proposes a similar approach for the NLP applications. A similar suggestion has
been proposed for models in [110]. Authors in [66] also propose having labels, just like nutrition
labels on food, in order to better categorize each data for each task. In addition to these general
techniques, some work has targeted more specific types of biases. For example, [81] has proposed
methods to test for cases of Simpson’s paradox in the data, and [3, 4] proposed methods to discover
Simpson’s paradoxes in data automatically. Causal models and graphs were also used in some work
to detect direct discrimination in the data along with its prevention technique that modifies the data
such that the predictions would be absent from direct discrimination [163]. [62] also worked on
preventing discrimination in data mining, targeting direct, indirect, and simultaneous effects. Other
pre-processing approaches, such as messaging [74], preferential sampling [75, 76], disparate impact
removal [51], also aim to remove biases from the data.
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
15
Area
Reference(s)
Classification
[78] [106] [57] [85] [147] [63] [159] [154] [69]
[25] [155] [122] [49] [73] [75]
Regression
[14] [1]
PCA
[137]
Community detection
[104]
Clustering
[31] [8]
Graph embedding
[22]
Causal inference
[96] [164] [165] [160] [116] [115] [162] [82] [127]
[161]
Variational auto encoders
[97] [5] [112] [42]
Adversarial learning
[90] [156]
Word embedding
[20] [169] [58] [23] [166]
Coreference resolution
[168] [134]
Language model
[21]
Sentence embedding
[100]
Machine translation
[52]
Semantic role labeling
[167]
Named Entity Recognition
[101]
Table 2. List of papers targeting and talking about bias and fairness in different areas.
Attribute
FHA
ECOA
Race
✓
✓
Color
✓
✓
National origin
✓
✓
Religion
✓
✓
Sex
✓
✓
Familial status
✓
Disability
✓
Exercised rights under CCPA
✓
Marital status
✓
Recipient of public assistance
✓
Age
✓
Table 3. A list of the protected attributes as specified in the Fair Housing and Equal Credit Opportunity
Acts (FHA and ECOA), from [30].
5.2
Fair Machine Learning
To address this issue, a variety of methods have been proposed that satisfy some of the fairness
definitions or other new definitions depending on the application.
5.2.1
Fair Classification. Since classification is a canonical task in machine learning and is
widely used in different areas that can be in direct contact with humans, it is important that these
types of methods be fair and be absent from biases that can harm some populations. Therefore,
certain methods have been proposed [57, 78, 85, 106] that satisfy certain definitions of fairness in
classification. For instance, in [147] authors try to satisfy subgroup fairness in classification, equality
of opportunity and equalized odds in [63], both disparate treatment and disparate impact in [2, 159],
16
Mehrabi et al.
and equalized odds in [154]. Other methods try to not only satisfy some fairness constraints but to
also be stable toward change in the test set [69]. The authors in [155], propose a general framework
for learning fair classifiers. This framework can be used for formulating fairness-aware classification
with fairness guarantees. In another work [25], authors propose three different modifications to the
existing Naive Bayes classifier for discrimination-free classification. [122] takes a new approach
into fair classification by imposing fairness constraints into a Multitask learning (MTL) framework.
In addition to imposing fairness during training, this approach can benefit the minority groups by
focusing on maximizing the average accuracy of each group as opposed to maximizing the accuracy
as a whole without attention to accuracy across different groups. In a similar work [49], authors
propose a decoupled classification system where a separate classifier is learned for each group. They
use transfer learning to reduce the issue of having less data for minority groups. In [73] authors
propose to achieve fair classification by mitigating the dependence of the classification outcome on
the sensitive attributes by utilizing the Wasserstein distance measure. In [75] authors propose the
Preferential Sampling (PS) method to create a discrimination free train data set. They then learn
a classifier on this discrimination free dataset to have a classifier with no discrimination. In [102],
authors propose a post-processing bias mitigation strategy that utilizes attention mechanism for
classification and that can provide interpretability.
Algorithm
Reference
Pre-Processing
In-Processing
Post-Processing
Community detection
[104]
✓
Word embedding
[23]
✓
Optimized pre-processing
[27]
✓
Data pre-processing
[76]
✓
Classification
[159]
✓
Regression
[14]
✓
Classification
[78]
✓
Classification
[155]
✓
Adversarial learning
[90]
✓
Classification
[63]
✓
Word embedding
[20]
✓
Classification
[125]
✓
Classification
[102]
✓
Table 4. Algorithms categorized into their appropriate groups based on being pre-processing, in-
processing, or post-processing.
5.2.2
Fair Regression. [14] proposes a fair regression method along with evaluating it with a
measure introduced as the “price of fairness” (POF) to measure accuracy-fairness trade-offs. They
introduce three fairness penalties as follows:
Individual Fairness: The definition for individual fairness as stated in [14], “for every cross pair
(𝑥,𝑦) ∈𝑆1, (𝑥′,𝑦′) ∈𝑆2, a model 𝑤is penalized for how differently it treats 𝑥and 𝑥′ (weighted by a
function of |𝑦−𝑦′|) where 𝑆1 and 𝑆2 are different groups from the sampled population.” Formally,
this is operationalized as
𝑓1(𝑤,𝑆) =
1
𝑛1𝑛2
∑︁
(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) ∈𝑆1
(𝑥𝑗,𝑦𝑗) ∈𝑆2
𝑑(𝑦𝑖,𝑦𝑗)(𝑤.𝑥𝑖−𝑤.𝑥𝑗)2
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
17
Group Fairness: "On average, the two groups’ instances should have similar labels (weighted by the
nearness of the labels of the instances)" [14].
𝑓2(𝑤,𝑆) =
 
1
𝑛1𝑛2
∑︁
(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) ∈𝑆1
(𝑥𝑗,𝑦𝑗) ∈𝑆2
𝑑(𝑦𝑖,𝑦𝑗)(𝑤.𝑥𝑖−𝑤.𝑥𝑗)
!2
Hybrid Fairness: "Hybrid fairness requires both positive and both negatively labeled cross pairs to be
treated similarly in an average over the two groups" [14].
𝑓3(𝑤,𝑆) =
 
∑︁
(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) ∈𝑆1
(𝑥𝑗,𝑦𝑗) ∈𝑆2
𝑦𝑖=𝑦𝑗=1
𝑑(𝑦𝑖,𝑦𝑗)(𝑤.𝑥𝑖−𝑤.𝑥𝑗)
𝑛1,1𝑛2,1
!2
+
 
∑︁
(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) ∈𝑆1
(𝑥𝑗,𝑦𝑗) ∈𝑆2
𝑦𝑖=𝑦𝑗=−1
𝑑(𝑦𝑖,𝑦𝑗)(𝑤.𝑥𝑖−𝑤.𝑥𝑗)
𝑛1,−1𝑛2,−1
!2
In addition to the previous work, [1] considers the fair regression problem formulation with regards
to two notions of fairness statistical (demographic) parity and bounded group loss. [2] uses decision
trees to satisfy disparate impact and treatment in regression tasks in addition to classification.
5.2.3
Structured Prediction. In [167], authors studied the semantic role-labeling models and a
famous dataset, imSitu, and realized that only 33% of agent roles in cooking images are man, and
the rest of 67% cooking images have woman as agents in the imSitu training set. They also noticed
that in addition to the existing bias in the dataset, the model would amplify the bias such that after
training a model5 on the dataset, bias is magnified for “man”, filling only 16% of cooking images.
Under these observations, the authors of the paper [167] show that structured prediction models
have the risk of leveraging social bias. Therefore, they propose a calibration algorithm called RBA
(reducing bias amplification); RBA is a technique for debiasing models by calibrating prediction in
structured prediction. The idea behind RBA is to ensure that the model predictions follow the same
distribution in the training data. They study two cases: multi-label object and visual semantic role
labeling classification. They show how these methods amplify the existing bias in data.
5.2.4
Fair PCA. In [137] authors show that vanilla PCA can exaggerate the error in reconstruction
in one group of people over a different group of equal size, so they propose a fair method to create
representations with similar richness for different populations—not to make them indistinguishable,
or to hide dependence on a sensitive or protected attribute. They show that vanilla PCA on the
labeled faces in the wild (LFW) dataset [68] has a lower reconstruction error rate for men than for
women faces, even if the sampling is done with an equal weight for both genders. They intend to
introduce a dimensionality reduction technique which maintains similar fidelity for different groups
and populations in the dataset. Therefore, they introduce Fair PCA and define a fair dimensionality
reduction algorithm. Their definition of Fair PCA (as an optimization function) is as follows, in
which 𝐴and 𝐵denote two subgroups, 𝑈𝐴and 𝑈𝐵denote matrices whose rows correspond to rows of
𝑈that contain members of subgroups 𝐴and 𝐵given 𝑚data points in 𝑅𝑛:
𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑈∈𝑅𝑚×𝑛,𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘(𝑈) ≤𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
(
1
|𝐴|𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠(𝐴,𝑈𝐴), 1
|𝐵|𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠(𝐵,𝑈𝐵)
)
And their proposed algorithm is a two-step process listed below:
(1) Relax the Fair PCA objective to a semidefinite program (SDP) and solve it.
(2) Solve a linear program that would reduce the rank of the solution.
5Specifically, a Conditional Random Field (CRF)
18
Mehrabi et al.
5.2.5
Community Detection/Graph Embedding/Clustering. Inequalities in online communities
and social networks can also potentially be another place where bias and discrimination can affect the
populations. For example, in online communities users with a fewer number of friends or followers
face a disadvantage of being heard in online social media [104]. In addition, existing methods, such
as community detection methods, can amplify this bias by ignoring these low-connected users in
the network or by wrongfully assigning them to the irrelevant and small communities. In [104]
authors show how this type of bias exists and is perpetuated by the existing community detection
methods. They propose a new attributed community detection method, called CLAN, to mitigate
the harm toward disadvantaged groups in online social communities. CLAN is a two-step process
that considers the network structure alongside node attributes to address exclusion bias, as indicated
below:
(1) Detect communities using modularity values (Step 1-unsupervised using only network struc-
ture).
(2) Train a classifier to classify users in the minor groups, putting them into one of the major
groups using held-out node attributes (Step 2-supervised using other node attributes).
Fair methods in domains similar to community detection are also proposed, such as graph embedding
[22] and clustering [8, 31].
5.2.6
Causal Approach to Fairness. Causal models can ascertain causal relationships between
variables. Using causal graphs one can represent these causal relationships between variables (nodes
of the graph) through the edges of the graph. These models can be used to remove unwanted causal
dependence of outcomes on sensitive attributes such as gender or race in designing systems or policies
[96]. Many researchers have used causal models and graphs to solve fairness-related concerns in
machine learning. In [33, 96], authors discuss in detail the subject of causality and its importance
while designing fair algorithms. There has been much research on discrimination discovery and re-
moval that uses causal models and graphs in order to make decisions that are irrespective of sensitive
attributes of groups or individuals. For instance, in [164] authors propose a causal-based framework
that detects direct and indirect discrimination in the data along with their removal techniques. [165]
is an extension to the previous work. [160] gives a nice overview of most of the previous work done
in this area by the authors, along with discussing system-, group-, and individual-level discrimination
and solving each using their previous methods, in addition to targeting direct and indirect discrimi-
nation. By expanding on the previous work and generalizing it, authors in [116] propose a similar
pathway approach for fair inference using causal graphs; this would restrict certain problematic and
discriminative pathways in the causal graph flexibly given any set of constraints. This holds when
the path-specific effects can be identified from the observed distribution. In [32] authors introduce
the path-specific counterfactual fairness definition which is an extension to counterfactual fairness
definition [87] and propose a method to achieve it further extending the work in [116]. In [115]
authors extended a formalization of algorithmic fairness from their previous work to the setting of
learning optimal policies that are subject to constraints based on definitions of fairness. They describe
several strategies for learning optimal policies by modifying some of the existing strategies, such as
Q-learning, value search, and G-estimation, based on some fairness considerations. In [162] authors
only target discrimination discovery and no removal by finding instances similar to another instance
and observing if a change in the protected attribute will change the outcome of the decision. If so,
they declare the existence of discrimination. In [82], authors define the following two notions of
discrimination—unresolved discrimination and proxy discrimination—as follows:
Unresolved Discrimination: "A variable V in a causal graph exhibits unresolved discrimination if
there exists a directed path from A to V that is not blocked by a resolving variable, and V itself is
non-resolving" [82].
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
19
Proxy Discrimination: "A variable V in a causal graph exhibits potential proxy discrimination, if
there exists a directed path from A to V that is blocked by a proxy variable and V itself is not a
proxy" [82]. They proposed methods to prevent and avoid them. They also show that no observational
criterion can determine whether a predictor exhibits unresolved discrimination; therefore, a causal
reasoning framework needs to be incorporated.
In [127], Instead of using the usual risk difference 𝑅𝐷= 𝑝1 −𝑝2, authors propose a causal risk
difference 𝑅𝐷𝑐= 𝑝1 −𝑝𝑐
2 for causal discrimination discovery. They define 𝑝𝑐
2 to be:
𝑝𝑐
2 =
Í
s∈𝑆,𝑑𝑒𝑐(s)=⊖𝑤(s)
Í
s∈𝑆𝑤(s)
𝑅𝐷𝑐not close to zero means that there is a bias in decision value due to group membership (causal
discrimination) or to covariates that have not been accounted for in the analysis (omitted variable
bias). This 𝑅𝐷𝑐then becomes their causal discrimination measure for discrimination discovery. [161]
is another work of this type that uses causal networks for discrimination discovery.
5.3
Fair Representation Learning
5.3.1
Variational Auto Encoders. Learning fair representations and avoiding the unfair interfer-
ence of sensitive attributes has been introduced in many different research papers. A well-known
example is the Variational Fair Autoencoder introduced in [97]. Here,they treat the sensitive variable
as the nuisance variable, so that by removing the information about this variable they will get a fair
representation. They use a maximum mean discrepancy regularizer to obtain invariance in the poste-
rior distribution over latent variables. Adding this maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) penalty into
the lower bound of their VAE architecture satisfies their proposed model for having the Variational
Fair Autoencoder. Similar work, but not targeting fairness specifically, has been introduced in [72].
In [5] authors also propose a debiased VAE architecture called DB-VAE which learns sensitive latent
variables that can bias the model (e.g., skin tone, gender, etc.) and propose an algorithm on top of this
DB-VAE using these latent variables to debias systems like facial detection systems. In [112] authors
model their representation-learning task as an optimization objective that would minimize the loss of
the mutual information between the encoding and the sensitive variable. The relaxed version of this
assumption is shown in Equation 1. They use this in order to learn fair representation and show that
adversarial training is unnecessary and in some cases even counter-productive. In Equation 1, c is the
sensitive variable and z the encoding of x.
𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑞
L(𝑞,𝑥) + 𝜆𝐼(𝑧,𝑐)
(1)
In [42], authors introduce flexibly fair representation learning by disentanglement that disentangles
information from multiple sensitive attributes. Their flexible and fair variational autoencoder is
not only flexible with respect to downstream task labels but also flexible with respect to sensitive
attributes. They address the demographic parity notion of fairness, which can target multiple sensitive
attributes or any subset combination of them.
5.3.2
Adversarial Learning. In [90] authors present a framework to mitigate bias in models
learned from data with stereotypical associations. They propose a model in which they are trying to
maximize accuracy of the predictor on y, and at the same time minimize the ability of the adversary
to predict the protected or sensitive variable (stereotyping variable z). The model consists of two
parts—the predictor and the adversary—as shown in Figure 6. In their model, the predictor is trained
to predict Y given X. With the help of a gradient-based approach like stochastic gradient descent,
the model tries to learn the weights W by minimizing some loss function LP(ˆ𝑦, y). The output layer
is passed to an adversary, which is another network. This network tries to predict Z. The adversary
20
Mehrabi et al.
may have different inputs depending on the fairness definition needing to be achieved. For instance,
in order to satisfy Demographic Parity, the adversary would try to predict the protected variable Z
using only the predicted label ˆ𝑌passed as an input to it, while preventing the adversary from learning
this is the goal of the predictor. Similarly, to achieve Equality of Odds, the adversary would get
the true label Y in addition to the predicted label ˆ𝑌. To satisfy Equality of Opportunity for a given
class y, they would only select instances for the adversary where Y=y. [156] takes an interesting
and different direction toward solving fairness issues using adversarial networks by introducing
FairGAN which generates synthetic data that is free from discrimination and is similar to the real
data. They use their newly generated synthetic data from FairGAN, which is now debiased, instead
of the real data for training and testing. They do not try to remove discrimination from the dataset,
unlike many of the existing approaches, but instead generate new datasets similar to the real one
which is debiased and preserves good data utility. The architecture of their FairGAN model is shown
in Figure 5. FairGAN consists of two components: a generator 𝐺𝐷𝑒𝑐which generates the fake data
conditioned on the protected attribute 𝑃𝐺(𝑥,𝑦,𝑠) = 𝑃𝐺(𝑥,𝑦|𝑠)𝑃𝐺(𝑠) where 𝑃𝐺(𝑠) = 𝑃𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎(𝑠), and two
discriminators 𝐷1 and 𝐷2. 𝐷1 is trained to differentiate the real data denoted by 𝑃𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎(𝑥,𝑦,𝑠) from
the generated fake data denoted by 𝑃𝐺(𝑥,𝑦,𝑠).
Pz
Noise
Ps
Protected Attribute
GDec
Generator
PG (!, #|%)
Pdata (!, #|%)
D2
Discriminator
D1
Discriminator
Real: (!, #, %)
Fake: (&!, &#, ̂%)
(&!, &#| ̂% = 0)
(&!, &#| ̂% = 1)
Fig. 5. Structure of FairGAN as proposed in [156].
Fig. 6. The architecture of adversarial network proposed in [90] © Brian Hu Zhang.
In addition to that, for achieving fairness constraints, such as statistical parity, 𝑃𝐺(𝑥,𝑦|𝑠= 1) =
𝑃𝐺(𝑥,𝑦|𝑠= 0), the training of 𝐷2 is such that it emphasizes differentiation of the two types of
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
21
synthetic (generated by the model) samples 𝑃𝐺(𝑥,𝑦|𝑠= 1) and 𝑃𝐺(𝑥,𝑦|𝑠= 0) indicating if the
synthetic samples are from the unprotected or protected groups. Here s denotes the protected or the
sensitive variable, and we adapted the same notation as in [156].
5.4
Fair NLP
5.4.1
Word Embedding. In [20] authors noticed that while using state-of-the-art word embeddings
in word analogy tests, “man” would be mapped to “computer programmer” and “woman” would
be mapped to “homemaker.” This bias toward woman triggered the authors to propose a method to
debias word embeddings by proposing a method that respects the embeddings for gender-specific
words but debiases embeddings for gender-neutral words by following these steps: (Notice that Step
2 has two different options. Depending on whether you target hard debiasing or soft debiasing, you
would use either step 2a or 2b)
(1) Identify gender subspace. Identifying a direction of the embedding that captures the bias
[20].
(2) Hard debiasing or soft debiasing:
(a) Hard debiasing (neutralize and equalize). Neutralize puts away the gender subspace
from gender-neutral words and makes sure that all the gender-neutral words are removed
and zeroed out in the gender subspace [20]. Equalize makes gender-neutral words to be
equidistant from the equality set of gendered words [20].
(b) Soft bias correction. Tries to move as little as possible to retain its similarity to the original
embedding as much as possible, while reducing the gender bias. This trade-off is controlled
by a parameter [20].
Following on the footsteps of these authors, other future work attempted to tackle this problem
[169] by generating a gender-neutral version of (Glove called GN-Glove) that tries to retain gender
information in some of the word embedding’s learned dimensions, while ensuring that other dimen-
sions are free from this gender effect. This approach primarily relies on Glove as its base model
with gender as the protected attribute. However, a recent paper [58] argues against these debiasing
techniques and states that many recent works on debiasing word embeddings have been superficial,
that those techniques just hide the bias and don’t actually remove it. A recent work [23] took a new
direction and proposed a preprocessing method for the discovery of the problematic documents in
the training corpus that have biases in them, and tried to debias the system by perturbing or removing
these documents efficiently from the training corpus. In a very recent work [166], authors target bias
in ELMo’s contextualized word vectors and attempt to analyze and mitigate the observed bias in the
embeddings. They show that the corpus used for training of ELMo has a significant gender skew,
with male entities being nearly three times more common than female entities. This automatically
leads to gender bias in these pretrained contextualized embeddings. They propose the following two
methods for mitigating the existing bias while using the pretrained embeddings in a downstream task,
coreference resolution: (1) train-time data augmentation approach, and (2) test-time neutralization
approach.
5.4.2
Coreference Resolution. The [168] paper shows that coreference systems have a gender
bias. They introduce a benchmark, called WinoBias, focusing on gender bias in coreference resolution.
In addition to that, they introduce a data-augmentation technique that removes bias in the existing
state-of-the-art coreferencing methods, in combination with using word2vec debiasing techniques.
Their general approach is as follows: They first generate auxiliary datasets using a rule-based
approach in which they replace all the male entities with female entities and the other way around.
Then they train models with a combination of the original and the auxiliary datasets. They use the
above solution in combination with word2vec debiasing techniques to generate word embeddings.
22
Mehrabi et al.
They also point out sources of gender bias in coreference systems and propose solutions to them.
They show that the first source of bias comes from the training data and propose a solution that
generates an auxiliary data set by swapping male and female entities. Another case arises from
the resource bias (word embeddings are bias), so the proposed solution is to replace Glove with a
debiased embedding method. Last, another source of bias can come from unbalanced gender lists, and
balancing the counts in the lists is a solution they proposed. In another work [134], authors also show
the existence of gender bias in three state-of-the-art coreference resolution systems by observing that
for many occupations, these systems resolve pronouns in a biased fashion by preferring one gender
over the other.
5.4.3
Language Model. In [21] authors introduce a metric for measuring gender bias in a
generated text from a language model based on recurrent neural networks that is trained on a text
corpus along with measuring the bias in the training text itself. They use Equation 2, where 𝑤is any
word in the corpus, 𝑓is a set of gendered words that belong to the female category, such as she, her,
woman, etc., and 𝑚to the male category, and measure the bias using the mean absolute and standard
deviation of the proposed metric along with fitting a univariate linear regression model over it and
then analyzing the effectiveness of each of those metrics while measuring the bias.
𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠(𝑤) = 𝑙𝑜𝑔( 𝑃(𝑤|𝑓)
𝑃(𝑤|𝑚) )
(2)
In their language model, they also introduce a regularization loss term that would minimize the
projection of embeddings trained by the encoder onto the embedding of the gender subspace following
the soft debiasing technique introduced in [20]. Finally, they evaluate the effectiveness of their method
on reducing gender bias and conclude by stating that in order to reduce bias, there is a compromise
on perplexity. They also point out the effectiveness of word-level bias metrics over the corpus-level
metrics.
5.4.4
Sentence Encoder. In [100] authors extend the research in detecting bias in word embed-
ding techniques to that of sentence embedding. They try to generalize bias-measuring techniques,
such as using the Word Embedding Association Test (WEAT [26]) in the context of sentence en-
coders by introducing their new sentence encoding bias-measuring techniques, the Sentence Encoder
Association Test (SEAT). They used state-of-the-art sentence encoding techniques, such as CBoW,
GPT, ELMo, and BERT, and find that although there was varying evidence of human-like bias in
sentence encoders using SEAT, more recent methods like BERT are more immune to biases. That
being said, they are not claiming that these models are bias-free, but state that more sophisticated
bias discovery techniques may be used in these cases, thereby encouraging more future work in this
area.
5.4.5
Machine Translation. In [52] authors noticed that when translating the word "friend" in the
following two sentences from English to Spanish, they achieved different results—although in both
cases this word should be translated the same way.
"She works in a hospital, my friend is a nurse."
"She works in a hospital, my friend is a doctor."
In both of these sentences, "friend" should be translated to the female version of Spanish friend
"amiga," but the results were not reflecting this expectation. For the second sentence, friend was
translated to "amigo,"—the male version of friend in Spanish. This is because doctor is more
stereotypical to males and nurse to females, and the model picks this bias or stereotype and reflects it
in its performance. To solve this, authors in [52] build an approach that leverages the fact that machine
translation uses word embeddings. They use the existing debiasing methods in word embedding and
apply them in the machine translation pipeline. This not only helped them to mitigate the existing bias
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
23
in their system, but also boosted the performance of their system by one BLUE score. In [126] authors
show that Google’s translate system can suffer from gender bias by making sentences taken from the
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics into a dozen languages that are gender neutral, including Yoruba,
Hungarian, and Chinese, translating them into English, and showing that Google Translate shows
favoritism toward males for stereotypical fields such as STEM jobs. In [148] authors annotated and
analyzed the Europarl dataset [84], a large political, multilingual dataset used in machine translation,
and discovered that with the exception of the youngest age group (20-30), which represents only a
very small percentage of the total amount of sentences (0.71%), more male data is available in all age
groups. They also looked at the entire dataset and showed that 67.39% of the sentences are produced
by male speakers. Furthermore, to mitigate the gender-related issues and to improve morphological
agreement in machine translation, they augmented every sentence with a tag on the English source
side, identifying the gender of the speaker. This helped the system in most of the cases, but not
always, so further work has been suggested for integrating speaker information in other ways.
5.4.6
Named Entity Recognition. In [101], authors investigate a type of existing bias in various
named entity recognition (NER) systems. In particular, they observed that in a context where an
entity should be tagged as a person entity, such as "John is a person" or "John is going to school",
more female names as opposed to male names are being tagged as non-person entities or not being
tagged at all. To further formalize their observations, authors propose six different evaluation metrics
that would measure amount of bias among different genders in NER systems. They curated templated
sentences pertaining to human actions and applied these metrics on names from U.S census data
incorporated into the templates. The six introduced measures each aim to demonstrate a certain type
of bias and serve a specific purpose in showing various results as follows:
• Error Type-1 Unweighted: Through this type of error, authors wanted to recognize the pro-
portion of entities that are tagged as anything other than the person entity in each of the male
vs female demographic groups. This could be the entity not being tagged or tagged as other
entities, such as location.
Í
𝑛∈𝑁𝑓𝐼(𝑛𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒≠𝑃𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑂𝑁)
|𝑁𝑓|
• Error Type-1 Weighted: This type of error is similar to its unweighted case except authors
considered the frequency or popularity of names so that they could penalize if a more popular
name is being tagged wrongfully.
Í
𝑛∈𝑁𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑓(𝑛𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒≠𝑃𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑂𝑁)
Í
𝑛∈𝑁𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑓(𝑛)
,
where 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑓(·) indicates the frequency of a name for a particular year in the female census
data. Likewise, 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑚(·) indicates the frequency of a name for a particular year in the male
census data.
• Error Type-2 Unweighted: This is a type of error in which the entity is tagged as other entities,
such as location or city. Notice that this error does not count if the entity is not tagged.
Í
𝑛∈𝑁𝑓𝐼(𝑛𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒∉{∅, 𝑃𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑂𝑁})
|𝑁𝑓|
,
where ∅indicates that the name is not tagged.
24
Mehrabi et al.
• Error Type-2 Weighted: This error is again similar to its unweighted case except the frequency
is taken into consideration.
Í
𝑛∈𝑁𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑓(𝑛𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒∉{∅, 𝑃𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑂𝑁})
Í
𝑛∈𝑁𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑓(𝑛)
• Error Type-3 Unweighted: This is a type of error in which it reports if the entity is not tagged
at all. Notice that even if the entity is tagged as a non-person entity this error type would not
consider it.
Í
𝑛∈𝑁𝑓𝐼(𝑛𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒= ∅)
|𝑁𝑓|
• Error Type-3 Weighted: Again, this error is similar to its unweighted case with frequency taken
into consideration.
Í
𝑛∈𝑁𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑓(𝑛𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒= ∅)
Í
𝑛∈𝑁𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑓(𝑛)
Authors also investigate the data that these NER systems are trained on and find that the data is also
biased toward female gender by not including as versatile names as there should be to represent
female names.
5.5
Comparison of Different Mitigation Algorithms
The field of algorithmic fairness is a relatively new area of research and work still needs to be done
for its improvement. With that being said, there are already papers that propose fair AI algorithms and
bias mitigation techniques and compare different mitigation algorithms using different benchmark
datasets in the fairness domain. For instance, authors in [65] propose a geometric solution to learn fair
representations that removes correlation between protected and unprotected features. The proposed
approach can control the trade-off between fairness and accuracy via an adjustable parameter. In
this work, authors evaluate the performance of their approach on different benchmark datasets, such
as COMPAS, Adult and German, and compare them against various different approaches for fair
learning algorithms considering fairness and accuracy measures [65, 72, 158, 159]. In addition,
IBM’s AI Fairness 360 (AIF360) toolkit [11] has implemented many of the current fair learning
algorithms and has demonstrated some of the results as demos which can be utilized by interested
users to compare different methods with regards to different fairness measures.
6
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR FAIRNESS RESEARCH
While there have been many definitions of, and approaches to, fairness in the literature, the study
in this area is anything but complete. Fairness and algorithmic bias still holds a number of research
opportunities. In this section, we provide pointers to outstanding challenges in fairness research, and
an overview of opportunities for development of understudied problems.
6.1
Challenges
There are several remaining challenges to be addressed in the fairness literature. Among them are:
(1) Synthesizing a definition of fairness. Several definitions of what would constitute fairness
from a machine learning perspective have been proposed in the literature. These definitions
cover a wide range of use cases, and as a result are somewhat disparate in their view of fairness.
Because of this, it is nearly impossible to understand how one fairness solution would fare
under a different definition of fairness. Synthesizing these definitions into one remains an open
research problem since it can make evaluation of these systems more unified and comparable.
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
25
having a more unified fairness definition and framework can also help with the incompatibility
issue of some current fairness definitions.
(2) From Equality to Equity. The definitions presented in the literature mostly focus on equality,
ensuring that each individual or group is given the same amount of resources, attention or
outcome. However, little attention has been paid to equity, which is the concept that each
individual or group is given the resources they need to succeed [60, 103]. Operationalizing this
definition and studying how it augments or contradicts existing definitions of fairness remains
an exciting future direction.
(3) Searching for Unfairness. Given a definition of fairness, it should be possible to identify
instances of this unfairness in a particular dataset. Inroads toward this problem have been made
in the areas of data bias by detecting instances of Simpson’s Paradox in arbitrary datasets [3];
however, unfairness may require more consideration due to the variety of definitions and the
nuances in detecting each one.
Fig. 7. Heatmap depicting distribution of previous work in fairness, grouped by domain and fairness
definition.
6.2
Opportunities
In this work we have taxonomized and summarized the current state of research into algorithmic
biases and fairness—with a particular focus on machine learning. Even in this area alone, the research
is broad. Subareas, from natural language processing, to representation learning, to community
detection, have all seen efforts to make their methodologies more fair. Nevertheless, every area
has not received the same amount of attention from the research community. Figure 7 provides an
overview of what has been done in different areas to address fairness—categorized by the fairness
definition type and domain. Some areas (e.g., community detection at the subgroup level) have
received no attention in the literature, and could be fertile future research areas.
7
CONCLUSION
In this survey we introduced problems that can adversely affect AI systems in terms of bias and
unfairness. The issues were viewed primarily from two dimensions: data and algorithms. We illus-
trated problems that demonstrate why fairness is an important issue. We further showed examples of
26
Mehrabi et al.
the potential real-world harm that unfairness can have on society—such as applications in judicial
systems, face recognition, and promoting algorithms. We then went over the definitions of fairness
and bias that have been proposed by researchers. To further stimulate the interest of readers, we
provided some of the work done in different areas in terms of addressing the biases that may affect AI
systems and different methods and domains in AI, such as general machine learning, deep learning
and natural language processing. We then further subdivided the fields into a more fine-grained
analysis of each subdomain and the work being done to address fairness constraints in each. The
hope is to expand the horizons of the readers to think deeply while working on a system or a method
to ensure that it has a low likelihood of causing potential harm or bias toward a particular group.
With the expansion of AI use in our world, it is important that researchers take this issue seriously
and expand their knowledge in this field. In this survey we categorized and created a taxonomy of
what has been done so far to address different issues in different domains regarding the fairness issue.
Other possible future work and directions can be taken to address the existing problems and biases in
AI that we discussed in the previous sections.
8
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) under Agreement No. HR0011890019. We would like to thank the organizers, speakers
and the attendees at the IVADO-Mila 2019 Summer School on Bias and Discrimination in AI. We
would like to also thank Brian Hu Zhang and Shreya Shankar.
9
APPENDIX
9.1
Datasets for Fairness Research
Aside from the existence of bias in datasets, there are datasets that are specifically used to address
bias and fairness issues in machine learning. There are also some datasets that are introduced to
target the issues and biases previously observed in older existing datasets. Below we list some of the
widely known datasets that have the characteristics discussed in this survey.
9.1.1
UCI Adult Dataset. UCI Adult dataset, also known as "Census Income" dataset, contains
information, extracted from the 1994 census data about people with attributes such as age, occupation,
education, race, sex, marital-status, native-country, hours-per-week etc., indicating whether the
income of a person exceeds $50K/yr or not. It can be used in fairness-related studies that want to
compare gender or race inequalities based on people’s annual incomes, or various other studies [7].
9.1.2
German Credit Dataset. The German Credit dataset contains 1000 credit records contain-
ing attributes such as personal status and sex, credit score, credit amount, housing status etc. It can
be used in studies about gender inequalities on credit-related issues [47].
9.1.3
WinoBias. The WinoBias dataset follows the winograd format and has 40 occupations in
sentences that are referenced to human pronouns. There are two types of challenge sentences in the
dataset requiring linkage of gendered pronouns to either male or female stereotypical occupations. It
was used in the coreference resolution study to certify if a system has gender bias or not—in this
case, towards stereotypical occupations [168].
9.1.4
Communities and Crime Dataset. The Communities and Crime dataset gathers infor-
mation from different communities in the United States related to several factors that can highly
influence some common crimes such as robberies, murders or rapes. The data includes crime data
obtained from the 1990 US LEMAS survey and the 1995 FBI Unified Crime Report. It also contains
socio-economic data from the 1990 US Census.
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
27
9.1.5
COMPAS Dataset. The COMPAS dataset contains records for defendants from Broward
County indicating their jail and prison times, demographics, criminal histories, and COMPAS risk
scores from 2013 to 2014 [89].
9.1.6
Recidivism in Juvenile Justice Dataset. The Recidivism in Juvenile Justice dataset
contains all juvenile offenders between ages 12-17 who committed a crime between years 2002 and
2010 and completed a prison sentence in 2010 in Catalonia’s juvenile justice system [145].
9.1.7
Pilot Parliaments Benchmark Dataset. The Pilot Parliaments Benchmark dataset, also
known as PPB, contains images of 1270 individuals in the national parliaments from three European
(Iceland, Finland, Sweden) and three African (Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa) countries. This
benchmark was released to have more gender and race balance, diversity, and representativeness
[24].
9.1.8
Diversity in Faces Dataset. The Diversity in Faces (DiF) is an image dataset collected for
fairness research in face recognition. DiF is a large dataset containing one million annotations for
face images. It is also a diverse dataset with diverse facial features, such as different craniofacial
distances, skin color, facial symmetry and contrast, age, pose, gender, resolution, along with diverse
areas and ratios [107].
Dataset Name
Reference Size
Area
UCI adult dataset
[7]
48,842 income records
Social
German credit dataset
[47]
1,000 credit records
Financial
Pilot parliaments benchmark dataset
[24]
1,270 images
Facial images
WinoBias
[168]
3,160 sentences
Coreference resolution
Communities and crime dataset
[129]
1,994 crime records
Social
COMPAS Dataset
[89]
18,610 crime records
Social
Recidivism in juvenile justice dataset
[28]
4,753 crime records
Social
Diversity in faces dataset
[107]
1 million images
Facial images
Table 5. Most widely used datasets in the fairness domain with additional information about each of
the datasets including their size and area of concentration.
REFERENCES
[1] Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudik, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. 2019. Fair Regression: Quantitative Definitions and Reduction-
Based Algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning. 120–129.
[2] Sina Aghaei, Mohammad Javad Azizi, and Phebe Vayanos. 2019. Learning optimal and fair decision trees for non-
discriminative decision-making. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 33. 1418–1426.
[3] Nazanin Alipourfard, Peter G Fennell, and Kristina Lerman. 2018. Can you Trust the Trend?: Discovering Simpson’s
Paradoxes in Social Data. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining. ACM, 19–27.
[4] Nazanin Alipourfard, Peter G Fennell, and Kristina Lerman. 2018. Using Simpson’s Paradox to Discover Interesting
Patterns in Behavioral Data. In Twelfth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.
[5] Alexander Amini, Ava Soleimany, Wilko Schwarting, Sangeeta Bhatia, and Daniela Rus. 2019. Uncovering and
Mitigating Algorithmic Bias through Learned Latent Structure. (2019).
[6] Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. 2016. Machine Bias: there’s software used across the
country to predict future criminals. And it’s biased against blacks. ProPublica 2016.
[7] A. Asuncion and D.J. Newman. 2007. UCI Machine Learning Repository.
http://www.ics.uci.edu/$\sim$mlearn/
{MLR}epository.html
[8] Arturs Backurs, Piotr Indyk, Krzysztof Onak, Baruch Schieber, Ali Vakilian, and Tal Wagner. 2019. Scalable Fair
Clustering. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, Vol. 97), Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (Eds.). PMLR, Long Beach, California,
USA, 405–413. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/backurs19a.html
28
Mehrabi et al.
[9] Ricardo Baeza-Yates. 2018. Bias on the Web. Commun. ACM 61, 6 (May 2018), 54–61.
https://doi.org/10.1145/
3209581
[10] Samuel Barbosa, Dan Cosley, Amit Sharma, and Roberto M. Cesar-Jr. 2016. Averaging Gone Wrong: Using Time-
Aware Analyses to Better Understand Behavior. (April 2016), 829–841.
[11] Rachel KE Bellamy, Kuntal Dey, Michael Hind, Samuel C Hoffman, Stephanie Houde, Kalapriya Kannan, Pranay
Lohia, Jacquelyn Martino, Sameep Mehta, Aleksandra Mojsilovic, et al. 2018. Ai fairness 360: An extensible toolkit
for detecting, understanding, and mitigating unwanted algorithmic bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01943 (2018).
[12] Emily M. Bender and Batya Friedman. 2018. Data Statements for Natural Language Processing: Toward Mitigating
System Bias and Enabling Better Science. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 6 (2018),
587–604. https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00041
[13] Misha Benjamin, Paul Gagnon, Negar Rostamzadeh, Chris Pal, Yoshua Bengio, and Alex Shee. [n.d.]. TOWARDS
STANDARDIZATION OF DATA LICENSES: THE MONTREAL DATA LICENSE. ([n. d.]).
[14] Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie Morgenstern, Seth Neel, and
Aaron Roth. 2017. A Convex Framework for Fair Regression. arXiv:1706.02409 [cs.LG]
[15] Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Michael Kearns, and Aaron Roth. [n.d.]. Fairness in criminal justice risk
assessments: The state of the art. Sociological Methods & Research ([n. d.]), 0049124118782533.
[16] Peter J Bickel, Eugene A Hammel, and J William O’Connell. 1975. Sex bias in graduate admissions: Data from
Berkeley. Science 187, 4175 (1975), 398–404.
[17] RDP Binns. 2018. Fairness in machine learning: Lessons from political philosophy. Journal of Machine Learning
Research (2018).
[18] Colin R Blyth. 1972. On Simpson’s paradox and the sure-thing principle. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 67, 338 (1972),
364–366.
[19] Miranda Bogen and Aaron Rieke. 2018. Help wanted: an examination of hiring algorithms, equity. Technical Report.
and bias. Technical report, Upturn.
[20] Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. 2016. Man is to computer
programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In Advances in neural information processing
systems. 4349–4357.
[21] Shikha Bordia and Samuel Bowman. 2019. Identifying and Reducing Gender Bias in Word-Level Language Models. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Student Research Workshop. 7–15.
[22] Avishek Bose and William Hamilton. 2019. Compositional Fairness Constraints for Graph Embeddings. In International
Conference on Machine Learning. 715–724.
[23] Marc-Etienne Brunet, Colleen Alkalay-Houlihan, Ashton Anderson, and Richard Zemel. 2019. Understanding the
Origins of Bias in Word Embeddings. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning
(Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 97), Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (Eds.). PMLR,
Long Beach, California, USA, 803–811. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/brunet19a.html
[24] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. 2018. Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender
Classification. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency (Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, Vol. 81), Sorelle A. Friedler and Christo Wilson (Eds.). PMLR, New York, NY, USA,
77–91. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/buolamwini18a.html
[25] Toon Calders and Sicco Verwer. 2010. Three naive Bayes approaches for discrimination-free classification. Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery 21, 2 (2010), 277–292.
[26] Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automatically from language corpora
contain human-like biases. Science 356, 6334 (2017), 183–186.
[27] Flavio Calmon, Dennis Wei, Bhanukiran Vinzamuri, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and Kush R Varshney. 2017.
Optimized Pre-Processing for Discrimination Prevention. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30,
I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates,
Inc., 3992–4001. http://papers.nips.cc/paper/6988-optimized-pre-processing-for-discrimination-prevention.pdf
[28] Manel Capdevila, Marta Ferrer, and Eulália Luque. 2005. La reincidencia en el delito en la justicia de menores. Centro
de estudios jurídicos y formación especializada, Generalitat de Catalunya. Documento no publicado (2005).
[29] Allison JB Chaney, Brandon M Stewart, and Barbara E Engelhardt. 2018. How algorithmic confounding in recom-
mendation systems increases homogeneity and decreases utility. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems. ACM, 224–232.
[30] Jiahao Chen, Nathan Kallus, Xiaojie Mao, Geoffry Svacha, and Madeleine Udell. 2019. Fairness Under Unawareness:
Assessing Disparity When Protected Class Is Unobserved. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency. ACM, 339–348.
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
29
[31] Xingyu Chen, Brandon Fain, Liang Lyu, and Kamesh Munagala. 2019. Proportionally Fair Clustering. In International
Conference on Machine Learning. 1032–1041.
[32] S. Chiappa. 2019. Path-specific Counterfactual Fairness. In Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
7801–7808.
[33] S. Chiappa and W. S. Isaac. 2019. A Causal Bayesian Networks Viewpoint on Fairness. In E. Kosta, J. Pierson,
D. Slamanig, S. Fischer-Hübner, S. Krenn (eds) Privacy and Identity Management. Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency in the Age of Big Data. Privacy and Identity 2018. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication
Technology, Vol. 547. Springer, Cham.
[34] Alexandra Chouldechova. 2017. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism prediction
instruments. Big data 5, 2 (2017), 153–163.
[35] Alexandra Chouldechova, Diana Benavides-Prado, Oleksandr Fialko, and Rhema Vaithianathan. 2018. A case study
of algorithm-assisted decision making in child maltreatment hotline screening decisions. In Proceedings of the 1st
Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 81),
Sorelle A. Friedler and Christo Wilson (Eds.). PMLR, New York, NY, USA, 134–148. http://proceedings.mlr.press/
v81/chouldechova18a.html
[36] Alexandra Chouldechova and Aaron Roth. 2018. The frontiers of fairness in machine learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.08810 (2018).
[37] John S Chuang, Olivier Rivoire, and Stanislas Leibler. 2009. Simpson’s paradox in a synthetic microbial system.
Science 323, 5911 (2009), 272–275.
[38] Kevin A Clarke. 2005. The phantom menace: Omitted variable bias in econometric research. Conflict management and
peace science 22, 4 (2005), 341–352.
[39] Lee Cohen, Zachary C. Lipton, and Yishay Mansour. 2019. Efficient candidate screening under multiple tests and
implications for fairness. arXiv:1905.11361 [cs.LG]
[40] United States. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. [n.d.]. EEOC compliance manual. [Washington, D.C.] :
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, [1992].
[41] Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. 2017. Algorithmic decision making and
the cost of fairness. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining. ACM, 797–806.
[42] Elliot Creager, David Madras, Joern-Henrik Jacobsen, Marissa Weis, Kevin Swersky, Toniann Pitassi, and Richard
Zemel. 2019. Flexibly Fair Representation Learning by Disentanglement. In International Conference on Machine
Learning. 1436–1445.
[43] Brian d’Alessandro, Cathy O’Neil, and Tom LaGatta. 2017. Conscientious classification: A data scientist’s guide to
discrimination-aware classification. Big data 5, 2 (2017), 120–134.
[44] David Danks and Alex John London. 2017. Algorithmic Bias in Autonomous Systems.. In IJCAI. 4691–4697.
[45] Shai Danziger, Jonathan Levav, and Liora Avnaim-Pesso. 2011. Extraneous factors in judicial decisions. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 17 (2011), 6889–6892.
[46] Julia Dressel and Hany Farid. 2018. The accuracy, fairness, and limits of predicting recidivism. Science Advances 4, 1
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aao5580 arXiv:https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/1/eaao5580.full.pdf
[47] Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. 2017. UCI Machine Learning Repository. http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml
[48] Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. 2012. Fairness Through Awareness.
In Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (Cambridge, Massachusetts) (ITCS
’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 214–226. https://doi.org/10.1145/2090236.2090255
[49] Cynthia Dwork, Nicole Immorlica, Adam Tauman Kalai, and Max Leiserson. 2018. Decoupled Classifiers for
Group-Fair and Efficient Machine Learning. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and
Transparency (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 81), Sorelle A. Friedler and Christo Wilson (Eds.).
PMLR, New York, NY, USA, 119–133. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/dwork18a.html
[50] Golnoosh Farnadi, Behrouz Babaki, and Lise Getoor. 2018. Fairness in Relational Domains. In Proceedings of the
2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (New Orleans, LA, USA) (AIES ’18). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 108–114. https://doi.org/10.1145/3278721.3278733
[51] Michael Feldman, Sorelle A. Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. 2015.
Certifying and Removing Disparate Impact. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (Sydney, NSW, Australia) (KDD ’15). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 259–268. https://doi.org/10.1145/2783258.2783311
[52] Joel Escudé Font and Marta R Costa-jussà. 2019. Equalizing Gender Biases in Neural Machine Translation with Word
Embeddings Techniques. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.03116 (2019).
[53] Batya Friedman and Helen Nissenbaum. 1996. Bias in Computer Systems. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 14, 3 (July 1996),
330–347. https://doi.org/10.1145/230538.230561
30
Mehrabi et al.
[54] Anna Fry, Thomas J Littlejohns, Cathie Sudlow, Nicola Doherty, Ligia Adamska, Tim Sprosen, Rory Collins, and
Naomi E Allen. 2017. Comparison of Sociodemographic and Health-Related Characteristics of UK Biobank Participants
With Those of the General Population. American Journal of Epidemiology 186, 9 (06 2017), 1026–1034.
https:
//doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwx246 arXiv:http://oup.prod.sis.lan/aje/article-pdf/186/9/1026/24330720/kwx246.pdf
[55] Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal Daumé III, and
Kate Crawford. [n.d.]. Datasheets for Datasets. ([n. d.]).
[56] C. E. Gehlke and Katherine Biehl. 1934. Certain effects of grouping upon the size of the correlation coefficient in
census tract material. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 29, 185A (1934), 169–170. https://doi.org/10.2307/2277827
[57] Naman Goel, Mohammad Yaghini, and Boi Faltings. 2018. Non-discriminatory machine learning through convex
fairness criteria. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[58] Hila Gonen and Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Lipstick on a Pig: Debiasing Methods Cover up Systematic Gender Biases in
Word Embeddings But do not Remove Them. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03862 (2019).
[59] Sandra González-Bailón, Ning Wang, Alejandro Rivero, Javier Borge-Holthoefer, and Yamir Moreno. 2014. Assessing
the bias in samples of large online networks. Social Networks 38 (2014), 16–27.
[60] Susan T Gooden. 2015. Race and social equity: A nervous area of government. Routledge.
[61] Nina Grgic-Hlaca, Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Krishna P Gummadi, and Adrian Weller. 2016. The case for process
fairness in learning: Feature selection for fair decision making. In NIPS Symposium on Machine Learning and the Law,
Vol. 1. 2.
[62] S. Hajian and J. Domingo-Ferrer. 2013.
A Methodology for Direct and Indirect Discrimination Prevention in
Data Mining. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 25, 7 (July 2013), 1445–1459.
https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2012.72
[63] Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, Nati Srebro, et al. 2016. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In Advances in neural
information processing systems. 3315–3323.
[64] Eszter Hargittai. 2007. Whose Space? Differences among Users and Non-Users of Social Network Sites. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication 13, 1 (10 2007), 276–297. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00396.x
arXiv:http://oup.prod.sis.lan/jcmc/article-pdf/13/1/276/22317170/jjcmcom0276.pdf
[65] Yuzi He, Keith Burghardt, and Kristina Lerman. 2020. A Geometric Solution to Fair Representations. In Proceedings
of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. 279–285.
[66] Sarah Holland, Ahmed Hosny, Sarah Newman, Joshua Joseph, and Kasia Chmielinski. 2018. The dataset nutrition
label: A framework to drive higher data quality standards. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.03677 (2018).
[67] Ayanna Howard and Jason Borenstein. 2018. The ugly truth about ourselves and our robot creations: the problem of
bias and social inequity. Science and engineering ethics 24, 5 (2018), 1521–1536.
[68] Gary B Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, and Eric Learned-Miller. 2008. Labeled faces in the wild: A database
forstudying face recognition in unconstrained environments.
[69] Lingxiao Huang and Nisheeth Vishnoi. 2019. Stable and Fair Classification. In International Conference on Machine
Learning. 2879–2890.
[70] Ben Hutchinson and Margaret Mitchell. 2019. 50 Years of Test (Un) fairness: Lessons for Machine Learning. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. ACM, 49–58.
[71] L. Introna and H. Nissenbaum. 2000. Defining the Web: the politics of search engines. Computer 33, 1 (Jan 2000),
54–62. https://doi.org/10.1109/2.816269
[72] Ayush Jaiswal, Yue Wu, Wael AbdAlmageed, and Premkumar Natarajan. 2018. Unsupervised Adversarial Invariance.
arXiv:1809.10083 [cs.LG]
[73] Ray Jiang, Aldo Pacchiano, Tom Stepleton, Heinrich Jiang, and Silvia Chiappa. [n.d.]. Wasserstein Fair Classification.
([n. d.]).
[74] F. Kamiran and T. Calders. 2009. Classifying without discriminating. In 2009 2nd International Conference on
Computer, Control and Communication. 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/IC4.2009.4909197
[75] Faisal Kamiran and Toon Calders. 2010. Classification with no discrimination by preferential sampling. In Proc. 19th
Machine Learning Conf. Belgium and The Netherlands. Citeseer, 1–6.
[76] Faisal Kamiran and Toon Calders. 2012. Data preprocessing techniques for classification without discrimination.
Knowledge and Information Systems 33, 1 (01 Oct 2012), 1–33. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10115-011-0463-8
[77] Faisal Kamiran and Indr˙e Žliobait˙e. 2013. Explainable and Non-explainable Discrimination in Classification. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 155–170. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-30487-3_8
[78] Toshihiro Kamishima, Shotaro Akaho, Hideki Asoh, and Jun Sakuma. 2012. Fairness-aware classifier with prejudice
remover regularizer. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases.
Springer, 35–50.
[79] Michael Kearns, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. 2018. Preventing Fairness Gerrymandering: Auditing
and Learning for Subgroup Fairness. In International Conference on Machine Learning. 2569–2577.
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
31
[80] Michael Kearns, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. 2019. An empirical study of rich subgroup fairness for
machine learning. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. ACM, 100–109.
[81] Rogier Kievit, Willem Eduard Frankenhuis, Lourens Waldorp, and Denny Borsboom. 2013. Simpson’s paradox in
psychological science: a practical guide. Frontiers in psychology 4 (2013), 513.
[82] Niki Kilbertus, Mateo Rojas Carulla, Giambattista Parascandolo, Moritz Hardt, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard
Schölkopf. 2017. Avoiding discrimination through causal reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. 656–666.
[83] Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. 2016. Inherent trade-offs in the fair determination of risk
scores. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05807 (2016).
[84] Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical machine translation. In MT summit, Vol. 5. 79–86.
[85] Emmanouil Krasanakis, Eleftherios Spyromitros-Xioufis, Symeon Papadopoulos, and Yiannis Kompatsiaris. 2018.
Adaptive Sensitive Reweighting to Mitigate Bias in Fairness-aware Classification. In Proceedings of the 2018 World
Wide Web Conference (Lyon, France) (WWW ’18). International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee,
Republic and Canton of Geneva, Switzerland, 853–862. https://doi.org/10.1145/3178876.3186133
[86] Ivan Krasin, Tom Duerig, Neil Alldrin, Vittorio Ferrari, Sami Abu-El-Haija, Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Jasper
Uijlings, Stefan Popov, Andreas Veit, et al. 2017. Openimages: A public dataset for large-scale multi-label and
multi-class image classification. Dataset available from https://github. com/openimages 2, 3 (2017), 2–3.
[87] Matt J Kusner, Joshua Loftus, Chris Russell, and Ricardo Silva. 2017. Counterfactual Fairness. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 30, I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and
R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 4066–4076. http://papers.nips.cc/paper/6995-counterfactual-fairness.pdf
[88] Anja Lambrecht and Catherine E Tucker. 2018. Algorithmic bias? An empirical study into apparent gender-based
discrimination in the display of STEM career ads. An Empirical Study into Apparent Gender-Based Discrimination in
the Display of STEM Career Ads (March 9, 2018) (2018).
[89] J Larson, S Mattu, L Kirchner, and J Angwin. 2016.
Compas analysis.
GitHub, available at: https://github.
com/propublica/compas-analysis[Google Scholar] (2016).
[90] Blake Lemoine, Brian Zhang, and M Mitchell. 2018. Mitigating Unwanted Biases with Adversarial Learning. (2018).
[91] Kristina Lerman. 2018. Computational social scientist beware: Simpson’s paradox in behavioral data. Journal of
Computational Social Science 1, 1 (2018), 49–58.
[92] Kristina Lerman and Tad Hogg. 2014. Leveraging position bias to improve peer recommendation. PLoS One 9, 6
(2014), e98914. http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0098914
[93] Kristina Lerman and Tad Hogg. 2014. Leveraging position bias to improve peer recommendation. PloS one 9, 6 (2014),
e98914.
[94] Zachary C Lipton, Alexandra Chouldechova, and Julian McAuley. 2017. Does mitigating ML’s disparate impact require
disparate treatment? stat 1050 (2017), 19.
[95] Lydia T Liu, Sarah Dean, Esther Rolf, Max Simchowitz, and Moritz Hardt. 2018. Delayed Impact of Fair Machine
Learning. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning.
[96] Joshua R Loftus, Chris Russell, Matt J Kusner, and Ricardo Silva. 2018. Causal reasoning for algorithmic fairness.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.05859 (2018).
[97] Christos Louizos, Kevin Swersky, Yujia Li, Max Welling, and Richard Zemel. 2016. THE VARIATIONAL FAIR
AUTOENCODER. stat 1050 (2016), 4.
[98] Arjun K. Manrai, Birgit H. Funke, Heidi L. Rehm, Morten S. Olesen, Bradley A. Maron, Peter Szolovits, David M.
Margulies, Joseph Loscalzo, and Isaac S. Kohane. 2016. Genetic Misdiagnoses and the Potential for Health Dis-
parities. New England Journal of Medicine 375, 7 (2016), 655–665.
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1507092
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1507092 PMID: 27532831.
[99] Ray Marshall. 1974. The economics of racial discrimination: A survey. Journal of Economic Literature 12, 3 (1974),
849–871.
[100] Chandler May, Alex Wang, Shikha Bordia, Samuel R Bowman, and Rachel Rudinger. 2019. On measuring social
biases in sentence encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10561 (2019).
[101] Ninareh Mehrabi, Thamme Gowda, Fred Morstatter, Nanyun Peng, and Aram Galstyan. 2019. Man is to Person as
Woman is to Location: Measuring Gender Bias in Named Entity Recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10872 (2019).
[102] Ninareh Mehrabi, Umang Gupta, Fred Morstatter, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. 2021. Attributing Fair Decisions
with Attention Interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03952 (2021).
[103] Ninareh Mehrabi, Yuzhong Huang, and Fred Morstatter. 2020. Statistical Equity: A Fairness Classification Objective.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.07293 (2020).
[104] Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nanyun Peng, and Aram Galstyan. 2019. Debiasing Community Detection: The
Importance of Lowly-Connected Nodes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.08136 (2019).
32
Mehrabi et al.
[105] Ninareh Mehrabi, Pei Zhou, Fred Morstatter, Jay Pujara, Xiang Ren, and Aram Galstyan. 2021. Lawyers are Dishonest?
Quantifying Representational Harms in Commonsense Knowledge Resources. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online and Punta
Cana, Dominican Republic, 5016–5033. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.410
[106] Aditya Krishna Menon and Robert C Williamson. 2018. The cost of fairness in binary classification. In Proceedings
of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
Vol. 81), Sorelle A. Friedler and Christo Wilson (Eds.). PMLR, New York, NY, USA, 107–118. http://proceedings.mlr.
press/v81/menon18a.html
[107] Michele Merler, Nalini Ratha, Rogerio S Feris, and John R Smith. 2019.
Diversity in Faces.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.10436 (2019).
[108] Hannah Jean Miller, Jacob Thebault-Spieker, Shuo Chang, Isaac Johnson, Loren Terveen, and Brent Hecht. 2016.
“Blissfully Happy” or “Ready toFight”: Varying Interpretations of Emoji. In Tenth International AAAI Conference on
Web and Social Media.
[109] I Minchev, G Matijevic, DW Hogg, G Guiglion, M Steinmetz, F Anders, C Chiappini, M Martig, A Queiroz, and C
Scannapieco. 2019. Yule-Simpson’s paradox in Galactic Archaeology. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01421 (2019).
[110] Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer,
Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. 2019. Model Cards for Model Reporting. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Atlanta, GA, USA) (FAT* ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 220–229.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287596
[111] Fred Morstatter, Jürgen Pfeffer, Huan Liu, and Kathleen M Carley. 2013. Is the sample good enough? Comparing data
from twitter’s streaming API with Twitter’s firehose. In 7th International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media, ICWSM 2013. AAAI press.
[112] Daniel Moyer, Shuyang Gao, Rob Brekelmans, Aram Galstyan, and Greg Ver Steeg. 2018. Invariant Representations
without Adversarial Training. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 9084–9093.
[113] Amitabha Mukerjee, Rita Biswas, Kalyanmoy Deb, and Amrit P Mathur. 2002. Multi–objective evolutionary algorithms
for the risk–return trade–off in bank loan management. International Transactions in operational research 9, 5 (2002),
583–597.
[114] David B Mustard. 2003. Reexamining criminal behavior: the importance of omitted variable bias. Review of Economics
and Statistics 85, 1 (2003), 205–211.
[115] Razieh Nabi, Daniel Malinsky, and Ilya Shpitser. 2018.
Learning Optimal Fair Policies.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.02244 (2018).
[116] Razieh Nabi and Ilya Shpitser. 2018. Fair inference on outcomes. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.
[117] Azadeh Nematzadeh, Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia, Filippo Menczer, and Alessandro Flammini. 2017. How algorithmic
popularity bias hinders or promotes quality. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00574 (2017).
[118] Dong-Phuong Nguyen, Rilana Gravel, Rudolf Berend Trieschnigg, and Theo Meder. 2013. "How old do you think
I am?": A study of language and age in Twitter. In Proceedings of the Seventh International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media, ICWSM 2013. AAAI Press, 439–448. eemcs-eprint-23604.
[119] Anne O’Keeffe and Michael McCarthy. 2010. The Routledge handbook of corpus linguistics. Routledge.
[120] Alexandra Olteanu, Carlos Castillo, Fernando Diaz, and Emre Kiciman. 2016. Social data: Biases, methodological
pitfalls, and ethical boundaries. (2016).
[121] Cathy O’Neil. 2016. Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy.
Crown Publishing Group, New York, NY, USA.
[122] Luca Oneto, Michele Doninini, Amon Elders, and Massimiliano Pontil. 2019. Taking advantage of multitask learning
for fair classification. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. 227–237.
[123] Osonde A Osoba and William Welser IV. 2017. An intelligence in our image: The risks of bias and errors in artificial
intelligence. Rand Corporation.
[124] Edmund S Phelps. 1972. The statistical theory of racism and sexism. The american economic review 62, 4 (1972),
659–661.
[125] Geoff Pleiss, Manish Raghavan, Felix Wu, Jon Kleinberg, and Kilian Q Weinberger. 2017.
On Fairness and
Calibration.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 5680–5689.
http:
//papers.nips.cc/paper/7151-on-fairness-and-calibration.pdf
[126] Marcelo OR Prates, Pedro H Avelar, and Luís C Lamb. 2018. Assessing gender bias in machine translation: a case
study with Google Translate. Neural Computing and Applications (2018), 1–19.
[127] Bilal Qureshi, Faisal Kamiran, Asim Karim, and Salvatore Ruggieri. 2016. Causal discrimination discovery through
propensity score analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03735 (2016).
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning
33
[128] Inioluwa Deborah Raji and Joy Buolamwini. 2019. Actionable auditing: Investigating the impact of publicly naming
biased performance results of commercial ai products.
[129] M Redmond. 2011. Communities and crime unnormalized data set. UCI Machine Learning Repository. In website:
http://www. ics. uci. edu/mlearn/MLRepository. html (2011).
[130] Willy E Rice. 1996. Race, Gender, Redlining, and the Discriminatory Access to Loans, Credit, and Insurance:
An Historical and Empirical Analysis of Consumers Who Sued Lenders and Insurers in Federal and State Courts,
1950-1995. San Diego L. Rev. 33 (1996), 583.
[131] Stephanie K Riegg. 2008. Causal inference and omitted variable bias in financial aid research: Assessing solutions.
The Review of Higher Education 31, 3 (2008), 329–354.
[132] Lauren A Rivera. 2012. Hiring as cultural matching: The case of elite professional service firms. American sociological
review 77, 6 (2012), 999–1022.
[133] Andrea Romei and Salvatore Ruggieri. 2011. A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis.
[134] Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian Leonard, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018. Gender Bias in Coreference
Resolution. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, New
Orleans, Louisiana, 8–14. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-2002
[135] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy,
Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. 2015. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. International journal
of computer vision 115, 3 (2015), 211–252.
[136] Pedro Saleiro, Benedict Kuester, Abby Stevens, Ari Anisfeld, Loren Hinkson, Jesse London, and Rayid Ghani. 2018.
Aequitas: A Bias and Fairness Audit Toolkit. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.05577 (2018).
[137] Samira Samadi, Uthaipon Tantipongpipat, Jamie Morgenstern, Mohit Singh, and Santosh Vempala. 2018. The Price
of Fair PCA: One Extra Dimension. In Proceedings of the 32Nd International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (Montr&#233;al, Canada) (NIPS’18). Curran Associates Inc., USA, 10999–11010. http://dl.acm.
org/citation.cfm?id=3327546.3327755
[138] Nripsuta Ani Saxena. 2019. Perceptions of Fairness. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society (Honolulu, HI, USA) (AIES ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 537–538. https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.
3314314
[139] Nripsuta Ani Saxena, Karen Huang, Evan DeFilippis, Goran Radanovic, David C Parkes, and Yang Liu. 2019. How Do
Fairness Definitions Fare?: Examining Public Attitudes Towards Algorithmic Definitions of Fairness. In Proceedings of
the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. ACM, 99–106.
[140] Tobias Schnabel, Adith Swaminathan, Ashudeep Singh, Navin Chandak, and Thorsten Joachims. 2016. Recom-
mendations as Treatments: Debiasing Learning and Evaluation. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
1670–1679.
[141] Andrew D Selbst, Danah Boyd, Sorelle A Friedler, Suresh Venkatasubramanian, and Janet Vertesi. 2019. Fairness and
abstraction in sociotechnical systems. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency.
ACM, 59–68.
[142] Shreya Shankar, Yoni Halpern, Eric Breck, James Atwood, Jimbo Wilson, and D Sculley. 2017. No Classification
without Representation: Assessing Geodiversity Issues in Open Data Sets for the Developing World. stat 1050 (2017),
22.
[143] Richard Shaw and Manuel Corpas. [n.d.]. Further bias in personal genomics? ([n. d.]).
[144] Harini Suresh and John V Guttag. 2019. A Framework for Understanding Unintended Consequences of Machine
Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10002 (2019).
[145] Songül Tolan, Marius Miron, Emilia Gómez, and Carlos Castillo. 2019. Why Machine Learning May Lead to
Unfairness: Evidence from Risk Assessment for Juvenile Justice in Catalonia. (2019).
[146] Zeynep Tufekci. 2014. Big questions for social media big data: Representativeness, validity and other methodological
pitfalls. In Eighth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.
[147] Berk Ustun, Yang Liu, and David Parkes. 2019. Fairness without Harm: Decoupled Classifiers with Preference
Guarantees. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, Vol. 97), Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (Eds.). PMLR, Long Beach, California,
USA, 6373–6382. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/ustun19a.html
[148] Eva Vanmassenhove, Christian Hardmeier, and Andy Way. 2018. Getting gender right in neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 3003–3008.
[149] Sahil Verma and Julia Rubin. 2018. Fairness definitions explained. In 2018 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on
Software Fairness (FairWare). IEEE, 1–7.
[150] Selwyn Vickers, Mona Fouad, and Moon S Chen Jr. 2014. Enhancing Minority Participation in Clinical Trials
(EMPaCT): laying the groundwork for improving minority clinical trial accrual. Cancer 120 (2014), vi–vii.
34
Mehrabi et al.
[151] Ting Wang and Dashun Wang. 2014. Why Amazon’s ratings might mislead you: The story of herding effects. Big data
2, 4 (2014), 196–204.
[152] Steven L Willborn. 1984. The disparate impact model of discrimination: Theory and limits. Am. UL Rev. 34 (1984),
799.
[153] Christo Wilson, Bryce Boe, Alessandra Sala, Krishna PN Puttaswamy, and Ben Y Zhao. 2009. User interactions in
social networks and their implications. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM European conference on Computer systems.
Acm, 205–218.
[154] Blake Woodworth, Suriya Gunasekar, Mesrob I Ohannessian, and Nathan Srebro. 2017. Learning non-discriminatory
predictors. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.06081 (2017).
[155] Yongkai Wu, Lu Zhang, and Xintao Wu. 2018. Fairness-aware Classification: Criterion, Convexity, and Bounds.
arXiv:1809.04737 [cs.LG]
[156] Depeng Xu, Shuhan Yuan, Lu Zhang, and Xintao Wu. 2018. Fairgan: Fairness-aware generative adversarial networks.
In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data). IEEE, 570–575.
[157] Irene Y Chen, Peter Szolovits, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. 2019. Can AI Help Reduce Disparities in General Medical and
Mental Health Care? AMA journal of ethics 21 (02 2019), E167–179. https://doi.org/10.1001/amajethics.2019.167
[158] Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, and Krishna P Gummadi. 2017. Fairness beyond
disparate treatment & disparate impact: Learning classification without disparate mistreatment. In Proceedings of the
26th international conference on world wide web. 1171–1180.
[159] Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, and Krishna P Gummadi. 2015. Fairness constraints:
Mechanisms for fair classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.05259 (2015).
[160] Lu Zhang and Xintao Wu. 2017. Anti-discrimination learning: a causal modeling-based framework. International
Journal of Data Science and Analytics 4, 1 (01 Aug 2017), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41060-017-0058-x
[161] Lu Zhang, Yongkai Wu, and Xintao Wu. 2016. On Discrimination Discovery Using Causal Networks. In Social,
Cultural, and Behavioral Modeling, Kevin S. Xu, David Reitter, Dongwon Lee, and Nathaniel Osgood (Eds.). Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 83–93.
[162] Lu Zhang, Yongkai Wu, and Xintao Wu. 2016. Situation Testing-based Discrimination Discovery: A Causal Inference
Approach. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (New York, New
York, USA) (IJCAI’16). AAAI Press, 2718–2724. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3060832.3061001
[163] Lu Zhang, Yongkai Wu, and Xintao Wu. 2017. Achieving non-discrimination in data release. In Proceedings of the
23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 1335–1344.
[164] Lu Zhang, Yongkai Wu, and Xintao Wu. 2017. A Causal Framework for Discovering and Removing Direct and Indirect
Discrimination. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-17.
3929–3935. https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2017/549
[165] L. Zhang, Y. Wu, and X. Wu. 2018. Causal Modeling-Based Discrimination Discovery and Removal: Criteria, Bounds,
and Algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (2018), 1–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.
2018.2872988
[166] Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Ryan Cotterell, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2019. Gender Bias
in Contextualized Word Embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers).
629–634.
[167] Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2017. Men Also Like Shopping:
Reducing Gender Bias Amplification using Corpus-level Constraints. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
[168] Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018. Gender Bias in Coreference
Resolution: Evaluation and Debiasing Methods. arXiv:1804.06876 [cs.CL]
[169] Jieyu Zhao, Yichao Zhou, Zeyu Li, Wei Wang, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018. Learning Gender-Neutral Word Embeddings.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 4847–4853.
[170] James Zou and Londa Schiebinger. 2018. AI can be sexist and racist it’s time to make it fair. Nature Publishing Group.
