Automated Design of Deep Learning Methods for
Biomedical Image Segmentation
Fabian Isensee1,2†, Paul F. Jaeger1†, Simon A. A. Kohl3‡, Jens Petersen1,4, and Klaus H.
Maier-Hein1,5*
1Division of Medical Image Computing, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg
2Faculty of Biosciences, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
3DeepMind, London, United Kingdom
4Faculty of Physics & Astronomy, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
5Pattern Analysis and Learning Group, Heidelberg University Hospital, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Heidelberg, Germany
*k.maier-hein@dkfz.de
Abstract
Biomedical imaging is a driver of scientiﬁc discovery and core component of
medical care, currently stimulated by the ﬁeld of deep learning. While semantic
segmentation algorithms enable 3D image analysis and quantiﬁcation in many
applications, the design of respective specialised solutions is non-trivial and highly
dependent on dataset properties and hardware conditions. We propose nnU-Net,
a deep learning framework that condenses the current domain knowledge and
autonomously takes the key decisions required to transfer a basic architecture to dif-
ferent datasets and segmentation tasks. Without manual tuning, nnU-Net surpasses
most specialised deep learning pipelines in 19 public international competitions and
sets a new state of the art in the majority of the 49 tasks. The results demonstrate
a vast hidden potential in the systematic adaptation of deep learning methods to
different datasets. We make nnU-Net publicly available as an open-source tool
that can effectively be used out-of-the-box, rendering state of the art segmentation
accessible to non-experts and catalyzing scientiﬁc progress as a framework for
automated method design.
1
Introduction
Semantic segmentation transforms raw biomedical image data into meaningful, spatially structured
information and thus plays an essential role for scientiﬁc discovery in the ﬁeld [9, 14]. At the same
time, semantic segmentation is an essential ingredient to numerous clinical applications [1, 27],
including applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in diagnostic support systems [7, 3], therapy planning
† Equal contribution. ‡ Work started while doing a PhD at the German Cancer Research Center.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:1904.08128v2  [cs.CV]  2 Apr 2020
support [28], intra-operative assistance [14] or tumor growth monitoring [19]. The high interest in
automatic segmentation methods manifests in a thriving research landscape, accounting for 70% of
international image analysis competitions in the biomedical sector [23].
Despite the recent success of deep learning-based segmentation methods, their applicability
to speciﬁc image analysis problems of end-users is often limited. The task-speciﬁc design and
conﬁguration of a method requires high levels of expertise and experience, with small errors leading
to strong performance drops [22]. Especially in 3D biomedical imaging, where dataset properties like
imaging modality, image size, (anisotropic) voxel spacing or class ratio vary drastically, the pipeline
design can be cumbersome, because experience on what constitutes a successful conﬁguration
may not translate to the dataset at hand. The numerous expert decisions involved in designing
and training a neural network range from the exact network architecture to the training schedule
and methods for data augmentation or post-processing. Each sub-component is controlled by
essential hyperparameters like learning rate, batch size, or class sampling [22]. An additional layer
of complexity on the overall setup is posed by the hardware available for training and inference
[21]. Algorithmic optimization of the codependent design choices in this high dimensional space
of hyperparameters is technically demanding and ampliﬁes both the number of required training
cases as well as compute resources by orders of magnitude [8]. As a consequence, the end-user is
commonly left with an iterative trial and error process during method design that is mostly driven
by their individual experience, only scarcely documented and hard to replicate, inevitably evoking
suboptimal segmentation pipelines and methodological ﬁndings that do not generalize to other
datasets [22, 2].
To further complicate things, there is an unmanageable number of research papers that pro-
pose architecture variations and extensions for performance improvement. This bulk of studies is
incomprehensible to the non-expert and difﬁcult to evaluate even for experts [22]. Approximately
12000 studies cite the 2015 U-Net architecture on biomedical image segmentation [31], many of
which propose extensions and advances. We put forward the hypothesis that a basic U-Net is still
hard to beat if the corresponding pipeline is designed adequately.
To this end, we propose nnU-Net (“no new net”), which makes successful 3D biomedical
image segmentation accessible for biomedical research applications. nnU-Net automatically adapts
to arbitrary datasets and enables out-of-the-box segmentation on account of two key contributions:
1. We formulate the pipeline optimization problem in terms of a data ﬁngerprint (representing
the key properties of a dataset) and a pipeline ﬁngerprint (representing the key design choices
of a segmentation algorithm).
2. We make their relation explicit by condensing domain knowledge into a set of heuristic
rules that robustly generate a high quality pipeline ﬁngerprint from a corresponding data
ﬁngerprint while considering associated hardware constraints.
In contrast to algorithmic approaches for method conﬁguration that are formulated as a task-speciﬁc
optimization problem, nnU-Net readily executes systematic rules to generate deep learning methods
for previously unseen datasets without need for further optimization.
In the following, we demonstrate the superiority of this concept by presenting a new state
of the art in numerous international challenges through application of our algorithm without manual
2
intervention.
The strong results underline the signiﬁcance of nnU-Net for users who require
algorithms for semantic segmentation on their custom datasets: as an open source tool, nnU-Net can
simply be downloaded and trained out-of-the box to generate state of the art segmentations without
requiring manual adaptation or expert knowledge. We further demonstrate shortcomings in the
design process of current biomedical segmentation methods. Speciﬁcally, we take an in-depth look at
the 2019 Kidney and Kidney Tumor Segmentation (KiTS) semantic image segmentation challenge
and demonstrate how important task-speciﬁc design and conﬁguration of a method are in comparison
to choosing one of the many architectural extensions and advances previously proposed on top of the
U-Net. By automating this design and conﬁguration process, nnU-Net fosters the ambition and the
ability of researchers to validate novel ideas on larger numbers of datasets, while at the same time
serving as an ideal reference method when demonstrating methodological improvements.
2
Results
nnU-Net is a deep learning framework that enables 3D semantic segmentation in many biomedical
imaging applications, without requiring the design of respective specialised solutions. Exemplary
segmentation results generated by nnU-Net for a variety of datasets are shown in Figure 1.
nnU-Net automatically adapts to any new dataset
Figure 2a shows the current practice of adapt-
ing segmentation pipelines to a new dataset. This process is expert-driven and involves manual
trial-and-error experiments that are typically speciﬁc to the task at hand [22]. As shown in Figure 2b,
nnU-Net addresses the adaptation process systematically. Therefore, we deﬁne a dataset ﬁngerprint
as a standardized dataset representation comprising key properties such as image sizes, voxel spacing
information or class ratios, and a pipeline ﬁngerprint as the entirety of choices being made during
method design. nnU-Net is designed to generate a successful pipeline ﬁngerprint for a given dataset
ﬁngerprint. In nnU-Net, the pipeline ﬁngerprint is divided into three groups: blueprint, inferred and
empirical parameters. The blueprint parameters represent fundamental design choices (such as using
a plain U-Net-like architecture template) as well as hyperparameters for which a robust default value
can simply be picked (for example loss function, training schedule and data augmentation). The
inferred parameters encode the necessary adaptations to a new dataset and include modiﬁcations
to the exact network topology, patch size, batch size and image preprocessing. The link between a
data ﬁngerprint and the inferred parameters is established via execution of a set of heuristic rules,
without the need for expensive re-optimization when applied to unseen datasets. Note that many of
these design choices are co-dependent: The target image spacing, for instance, affects image size,
which in return determines the size of patches the model should see during training, which affects
the network topology and has to be counterbalanced by the size of training mini-batches in order to
not exceed GPU memory limitations. nnU-Net strips the user of the burden to manually account for
these co-dependencies. The empirical parameters are autonomously identiﬁed via cross-validation
on the training cases. Per default, nnU-Net generates three different U-Net conﬁgurations: a 2D
U-Net, a 3D U-Net that operates at full image resolution and a 3D U-Net cascade where the ﬁrst
U-Net operates on downsampled images and the second is trained to reﬁne the segmentation maps
created by the former at full resolution. After cross-validation nnU-Net empirically chooses the best
performing conﬁguration or ensemble. Finally, nnU-Net empirically opts for “non-largest component
suppression” as a postprocessing step if performance gains are measured. The output of nnU-Net’s
automated adaptation and training process are fully trained U-Net models that can be deployed to
make predictions on unseen images. We provide an in-depth description of the methodology behind
nnU-Net in the online methods. The overarching design principles, i.e. our best-practice recommen-
3
Figure 1: nnU-Net handles a broad variety of datasets and target image properties. All examples
originate from the test sets of different international segmentation challenges that nnU-Net was applied
on. Target structures for each dataset are shown in 2D projected onto the raw data (left) and in 3D
together with a volume rendering of the raw data (right). All visualizations are created with the
MITK Workbench [29]. a: heart (green), aorta (red), trachea (blue) and esophagus (yellow) in CT
images (D18). b: synaptic clefts (green) in electron microscopy scans (D19). c: liver (yellow),
spleen (orange), left/right kidney (blue/green) in T1 in-phase MRI (D16). d: thirteen abdominal
organs in CT images (D11). e: liver (yellow) and liver tumors (green) in CT images (D14). f: right
ventricle (yellow), left ventricular cavity (blue) myocardium of left ventricle (green) in cine MRI
(D13). g: prostate (yellow) in T2 MRI (D12). h: lung nodules (yellow) in CT images (D6). i: kidneys
(yellow) and kidney tumors (green) in CT images (D17). j: edema (yellow), enhancing tumor (purple),
necrosis (green) in MRI (T1, T1 with contrast agent, T2, FLAIR) (D1). k: left ventricle (yellow) in
MRI (D2). l: hepatic vessels (yellow) and liver tumors (green) in CT (D8). See Figure 5 for dataset
references.
4
Figure 2: Manual and proposed automated conﬁguration of deep learning methods. a) Current
practice of conﬁguring a deep learning method for biomedical segmentation: An iterative trial and
error process of manually choosing a set of hyperparameters and architecture conﬁgurations, training
the model, and monitoring performance of the model on a validation set. b) Proposed automated
conﬁguration by nnU-Net: Dataset properties are summarized in a “dataset ﬁngerprint”. A set
of heuristic rules operates on this ﬁngerprint to infer the data-dependent hyperparameters of the
pipeline. These are completed by blueprint parameters, the data-independent design choices to form
“pipeline ﬁngerprints”. Three architectures are trained based on these pipeline ﬁngerprints in a 5-fold
cross-validation. Finally, nnU-Net automatically selects the optimal ensemble of these architectures
and performs postprocessing if required.
dations for method adaptation to new datasets, are summarized in Supplementary Information B.
All segmentation pipelines generated by nnU-Net in the context of this manuscript are provided in
Supplementary Information F.
nnU-Net handles a wide variety of target structures and image properties
We demonstrate the
value of nnU-Net as an out-of-the-box segmentation tool by applying it to 10 international biomedical
image segmentation challenges comprising 19 different datasets and 49 segmentation tasks across a
variety of organs, organ substructures, tumors, lesions and cellular structures in magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), computed tomography scans (CT) as well as electron microscopy (EM) images.
Challenges are international competitions that can be seen as the equivalent to clinical trials for
algorithm benchmarking. Typically, they are hosted by individual researchers, institutes, or societies,
aiming to assess the performance of multiple algorithms in a standardized environment [23]. In
all segmentation tasks, nnU-Net was trained from scratch using only the provided challenge data.
While the methodology behind nnU-Net was developed on the 10 training sets provided by the
Medical Segmentation Decathlon [32], the remaining datasets and tasks were used for independent
testing, i.e. nnU-Net was simply applied without further optimization. Qualitatively, we observe that
5
nnU-Net is able to handle a large disparity in dataset properties and diversity in target structures,
i.e. generated pipeline conﬁgurations are in line with what human experts consider a reasonable or
sensible setting (see Supplementary Information C.1and C.2). Examples for segmentation results
generated by nnU-Net are presented in Figure 1.
nnU-Net outperforms specialized pipelines in a range of diverse tasks
Most international chal-
lenges use the Soerensen-Dice coefﬁcient as a measure of overlap to quantify segmentation quality
[13, 4, 25, 3]. Here, perfect agreement results in a Dice coefﬁcient of 1, whereas no agreement
results in a score of 0. Other metrics used by some of the challenges include the Normalized Surface
Dice (higher is better) [7] and the Hausdorff Distance (lower is better), both quantifying the distance
between the borders of two segmentations. Figure 3 provides an overview of the quantitative results
achieved by nnU-Net and the competing challenge teams across all 49 segmentation tasks. Despite
its generic nature, nnU-Net outperforms most existing semantic segmentation solutions, even though
the latter were speciﬁcally optimized towards the respective task. Overall, nnU-Net sets a new state
of the art in 29 out of 49 target structures and otherwise shows performances on par with or close to
the top leaderboard entries.
Details in pipeline conﬁguration have more impact on performance than architectural varia-
tions
To highlight how important the task-speciﬁc design and conﬁguration of a method are in
comparison to choosing one of the many architectural extensions and advances previously proposed
on top of the U-Net, we put our results into context of current research by analyzing the participating
algorithms in the recent Kidney and Kidney Tumor Segmentation (KiTS) 2019 challenge hosted by
the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) society [13]. The
MICCAI society has consistently been hosting at least 50% of all annual biomedical image analysis
challenges [23]. With more than 100 competitors, the KiTS challenge was the largest competition at
MICCAI 2019. Our analysis of the KiTS leaderboard1 (see Figure 4a) reveals several insights on the
current landscape of deep learning based segmentation method design: First, the top-15 methods were
offspring of the (3D) U-Net architecture from 2016, conﬁrming its impact on the ﬁeld of biomedical
image segmentation. Second, the ﬁgure demonstrates that contributions using the same type of
network result in performances spread across the entire leaderboard. Third, when looking closer into
the top-15, none of the commonly used architectural modiﬁcations (e.g. residual connections [26, 10],
dense connections [18, 15], attention mechanisms [30] or dilated convolutions [5, 24]) represent a
necessary condition for good performance on the KiTS task. By example this shows that many of
the previously introduced algorithm modiﬁcations may not generally be superior to a properly tuned
baseline method.
Figure 4b underlines the importance of hyperparameter tuning by analyzing algorithms using the same
architecture variant as the challenge-winning contribution, a 3D U-Net with residual connections.
While one of these methods won the challenge, other contributions based on the same principle cover
the entire range of evaluation scores and rankings. Key conﬁguration parameters were selected from
respective pipeline ﬁngerprints and are shown for all non-cascaded residual U-Nets, illustrating the
co-dependent design choices that each team made during pipeline design. The drastically varying
conﬁgurations submitted by contestants indicate the underlying complexity of the high-dimensional
optimization problem that is implicitly posed by designing a deep learning method for biomedical 3D
image segmentation.
1http://results.kits-challenge.org/miccai2019/
6
Figure 3: nnU-Net outperforms most specialized deep learning pipelines. Quantitative results
from all international challenges that nnU-Net competed in. For each segmentation task, results
achieved by nnU-Net are highlighted in red, competing teams are shown in blue. For each segmenta-
tion task the respective rank is displayed in the bottom right corner as nnU-Net’s rank / total number
of submissions. Axis scales: [DC] Dice coefﬁcient, [OH] other score (higher is better), [OL] other
score (lower is better). All leaderboards were accessed on December 12th 2019.
7
Figure 4: Pipeline ﬁngerprints from KITS 2019 [13] leaderboard entries. a) Coarse categoriza-
tion of leaderboard entries by architecture variation. All top 15 contributions are encoder-decoder
architectures with skip-connections, 3D convolutions and output stride 1 (“3D U-Net-like”, purple).
No clear pattern arises from further sub-groupings into different architectural variations. Also,
none of the analyzed architectures guarantees good performance, indicating a large dependency of
performance beyond architecture type. b) Finer-grained key parameters selected from the pipeline
ﬁngerprints of all non-cascade 3D-U-Net-like architectures with residual connections (displayed on
z-score normalized scale). The contributions vary drastically in their rankings as well as their ﬁnger-
prints. Still, there is no evident relation between single parameters and performance. Abbreviations:
CE = Cross entropy loss function, Dice = Soft Dice loss function, WBCE = Weighted binary cross
entropy loss function.
nnU-Net experimentally conﬁrms the importance of good hyperparameters over architectural vari-
ations on the KiTS dataset by setting a new state of the art on the open leaderboard (which also
includes the original challenge submissions analysed here) with a plain 3D U-Net architecture (see
Figure 3). Our results from further international challenge participations conﬁrm this observation
across a variety of datasets.
Different datasets require different pipeline conﬁgurations
We extract the data ﬁngerprints of
19 biomedical segmentation datasets. As displayed in Figure 5, this documents an exceptional dataset
diversity in biomedical imaging, and reveals the fundamental reason behind the lack of out-of-the-box
8
Figure 5: Data ﬁngerprints across different challenge datasets. The data ﬁngerprints show the
key properties (displayed on z-score normalized scale) for the 19 datasets used in the nnU-Net experi-
ments (see Supplementary Material A for detailed dataset descriptions). Datasets vary tremendously
in their properties, requiring intense method adaptation to the individual dataset and underlining
the need for evaluation on larger numbers of datasets when drawing general methodological conclu-
sions. Abbreviations: EM = Electron Microscopy, CT = Computed Tomography, MRI = Magnetic
Resonance Imaging.
segmentation algorithms: The complexity of method design is ampliﬁed by the fact that suitable
pipeline settings either directly or indirectly depend on the data ﬁngerprint under potentially complex
relations. As a consequence, pipeline settings that are identiﬁed as optimal for one dataset (such
as KiTS, see above) may not generalize to others, resulting in a need for (currently manual) re-
optimization on each individual dataset. An example for conﬁguration parameters depending on
dataset properties is the image size which affects the size of patches that the model sees during training,
which in turn affects the required network topology (i.e. number of downsampling steps, size of
convolution ﬁlters, etc.). The network topology itself again inﬂuences several other hyperparameters
in the pipeline.
Multiple tasks enable robust design decisions
nnU-Net is a framework that enables benchmark-
ing of new modiﬁcations or extensions of methods across multiple datasets without having to manually
reconﬁgure the entire pipeline for each dataset. To demonstrate this, and also to support some of the
core design choices made in nnU-Net, we systematically tested the performance of common pipeline
variations in the nnU-Net blueprint parameters on 10 different datasets (Figure 6): the application
of two alternative loss functions (Cross-entropy and TopK10 [35]), the introduction of residual
connections in the encoder [11], using three convolutions per resolution instead of two (resulting
in a deeper network architecture), two modiﬁcations of the optimizer (a reduced momentum term
and an alternative optimizer (Adam [20])), batch norm [17] instead of instance norm [33] and the
omission of data augmentation. Ranking stability was estimated by bootstrapping as suggested by the
challengeR tool [34].
The volatility of the ranking between datasets demonstrates how single hyperparameter choices can
affect segmentation performance depending on the dataset. The results clearly show that caution is
required when drawing methodological conclusions from evaluations that are based on an insufﬁcient
number of datasets. While ﬁve out of the nine variants achieved rank 1 in at least one of the
9
Figure 6: Evaluation of design decisions across multiple tasks. (a-j) Evaluation of exemplary
model variations on ten datasets of the medical segmentation decathlon (D1-D10, see Figure 5 for
dataset references). The analysis is done for every dataset by aggregating validation splits of the
ﬁve-fold cross-validation into one large validation set. 1000 virtual validation sets are generated
via bootstrapping (drawn with replacement). Algorithms are ranked on each virtual validation set,
resulting in a distribution over rankings. The results indicate that evaluation of methodological
variations on too few datasets is prone to result in a misleading level of generality, since most
performance changes are not consistent over datasets. (k) The aggregation of rankings across datasets
yields insights into what design decisions robustly generalize.
datasets, neither of them exhibits consistent improvements across the ten tasks. The original nnU-Net
conﬁguration shows the best generalization and ranks ﬁrst when aggregating results of all datasets.
In current research practice, evaluation is rarely performed on more than two datasets and even then
the datasets come with largely overlapping properties (such as both being abdominal CT scans). As
we showed here, such evaluation is unsuitable for drawing general methodological conclusions. We
relate the lack of sufﬁciently broad evaluations to the manual tuning effort required when adapting
existing pipelines to individual datasets. nnU-Net alleviates this shortcoming in two ways: As a
framework that can be extended to enable effective evaluation of new concepts across multiple tasks,
and as a plug-and-play, standardized and state-of-the-art baseline to compare against.
10
nnU-Net is freely available and can be used out-of-the-box
nnU-Net is freely available as an
open-source tool. It can be installed via Python Package Index (PyPI). The source code is publicly
available on Github (https://github.com/MIC-DKFZ/nnUNet). A comprehensive documentation
is available together with the source code. Pretrained models for all presented datasets are available
for download at https://zenodo.org/record/3734294.
3
Discussion
We presented nnU-Net, a deep learning framework for biomedical image analysis that automates
model design for 3D semantic segmentation tasks. The method sets a new state of the art in the
majority of tasks it was evaluated on, outperforming all respective specialized processing pipelines.
The strong performance of nnU-Net is not achieved by a new network architecture, loss function or
training scheme (hence the name nnU-Net - “no new net”), but by replacing the complex process of
manual pipeline optimization with a systematic approach based on explicit and interpretable heuristic
rules. Requiring zero user-intervention, nnU-Net is the ﬁrst segmentation tool that can be applied
out-of-the-box to a very large range of biomedical imaging datasets and is thus the ideal tool for
users who require access to semantic segmentation methods and do not have the expertise, time, or
compute resources required to manually adapt existing solutions to their problem.
Our analysis on the KITS leaderboard as well as nnU-Net’s performance across 19 datasets
conﬁrms our initial hypothesis that common architectural modiﬁcations proposed by the ﬁeld during
the last 5 years may not necessarily be required to achieve state-of-the-art segmentation performance.
Instead, we observed that contributions using the same type of network result in performances
spread across the entire leaderboard. This observation is in line with Litjens et al., who, in their
review from 2017, found that "many researchers use the exact same architectures [...] but have
widely varying results" [22]. There are several possible reasons for why performance improvements
based on architectural extensions proposed by the literature may not hold beyond the dataset they
were proposed on: many of them are evaluated on a limited amount of datasets, often as low as a
single one. In practice this largely limits their success on unseen datasets with varying properties,
because the quality of the hyperparameter conﬁguration often overshadows the effect of the evaluated
architectural modiﬁcation. This ﬁnding is in line with an observation by Litjens et al., who concluded
that "the exact architecture is not the most important determinant in getting a good solution" [22].
Moreover, as shown above, it can be difﬁcult to tune existing baselines to a given dataset. This
obstacle can unknowingly, but nonetheless unduly, make a new approach look better than the baseline,
resulting in biased literature.
In this work, we demonstrated that nnU-Net is able to alleviate this bottleneck of current
research in biomedical image segmentation in two ways: On the one hand, nnU-Net serves as a
framework for methodological modiﬁcations enabling simple evaluation on an arbitrary number of
datasets. On the other hand, nnU-Net represents the ﬁrst standardized method that does not require
manual task-speciﬁc adaptation and as such can readily serve as a strong baseline on any new 3D
segmentation task.
The research performed in “AutoML” [16, 6] or “Neural architecture search” [8] has simi-
larities to our approach in that this line of research seeks to strip the ML user or researcher of the
burden to manually ﬁnd good hyperparameters. In contrast to nnU-Net however, AutoML aims to
11
learn hyperparameters directly from the data. This comes with practical difﬁculties such as enormous
requirements with respect to compute and data resources. Additionally, AutoML methods need to
optimize the hyperparameters for each new task. The same disadvantages apply to “Grid Search” [2],
where extensive trial and error sweeps in the hyperparameter landscape are performed to empirically
ﬁnd good conﬁgurations for a speciﬁc task. In contrast, nnU-Net transforms domain knowledge into
inductive biases, thus shortcuts the high dimensional optimization of hyperparameters and minimizes
required computational and data resources. As elaborated above, these heuristics are developed
on the basis of 10 different datasets of the Medical Segmentation Decathlon. The diversity within
these 10 datasets has proven sufﬁcient to achieve robustness to the variability encountered in all the
remaining challenge participations. This is quite remarkable given the underlying complexity of
method design and strongly conﬁrms the suitability of condensing the process in a few generally
applicable rules that are simply executed when given a new dataset ﬁngerprint and do not require any
further task-speciﬁc actions. The formal deﬁnition and also publishing of these explicit rules is a
step towards systematicity and interpretability in the task of hyperparameter selection, which has
previously been considered a “highly empirical exercise”, for which “no clear recipe can be given.”
[22].
Despite its strong performance across 49 diverse tasks, there might be segmentation tasks
for which nnU-Net’s automatic adaptation is suboptimal. For example, nnU-Net was developed
with a focus on the Dice coefﬁcient as performance metric. Some tasks, however, might require
highly domain speciﬁc target metrics for performance evaluation, which could inﬂuence method
design.
Also, yet unconsidered dataset properties could exist which may cause suboptimal
segmentation performance. One example is the synaptic cleft segmentation task of the CREMI
challenge (https://cremi.org). While nnU-Net’s performance is highly competitive (rank 6/39),
manual adaptation of the loss function as well as electron microscopy-speciﬁc preprocessing may be
necessary to surpass state-of-the-art performance [12]. In principle, there are two ways of handling
cases that are not yet optimally covered by nnU-Net: For potentially re-occurring cases, nnU-Net’s
heuristics could be extended accordingly; for highly domain speciﬁc cases, nnU-Net should be seen
as a good starting point for necessary modiﬁcations.
In summary, nnU-Net sets a new state of the art in various semantic segmentation chal-
lenges and displays strong generalization characteristics without need for any manual intervention,
such as the tuning of hyper-parameters. As pointed out by Litjens et al. and quantitatively conﬁrmed
here, hyper-parameter optimization constitutes a major difﬁculty for past and current research
in biomedical image segmentation. nnU-Net automates the otherwise often unsystematic and
cumbersome procedure and may thus help alleviate this burden. We propose to leverage nnU-Net as
an out-of-the box tool for state-of-the-art segmentation, a framework for large-scale evaluation of
novel ideas without manual effort, and as a standardized baseline method to compare ideas against
without the need for task-speciﬁc optimization.
4
Acknowledgements
This work was co-funded by the National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) in Heidelberg and
the Helmholtz Imaging Platform (HIP) of the German Cancer Consortium (DKTK). We thank our
colleagues at DKFZ who were involved in the various challenge contributions, especially Andre
Klein, David Zimmerer, Jakob Wasserthal, Gregor Koehler, Tobias Norajitra and Sebastian Wirkert
12
who contributed to the Decathlon submission. We also thank the MITK team who supported us in
producing all medical dataset visualizations. We are also thankful to all the challenge organizers,
who provided an important basis for our work. We want to especially mention Nicholas Heller, who
enabled the collection of all the details from the KiTS challenge through excellent challenge design,
and Emre Kavur from the CHAOS team, who generated comprehensive leaderboard information for
us. We thank Manuel Wiesenfarth for his helpful advice concerning the ranking of methods and the
visualization of rankings. Last but not least, we thank Olaf Ronneberger and Lena Maier-Hein for
their important feedback on this manuscript.
References
[1] H. J. Aerts, E. R. Velazquez, R. T. Leijenaar, C. Parmar, P. Grossmann, S. Carvalho, J. Bussink,
R. Monshouwer, B. Haibe-Kains, D. Rietveld, et al. Decoding tumour phenotype by noninvasive
imaging using a quantitative radiomics approach. Nature communications, 5(1):1–9, 2014.
[2] J. Bergstra and Y. Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of machine
learning research, 13(Feb):281–305, 2012.
[3] O. Bernard, A. Lalande, C. Zotti, F. Cervenansky, X. Yang, P.-A. Heng, I. Cetin, K. Lekadir,
O. Camara, M. A. G. Ballester, et al. Deep learning techniques for automatic mri cardiac multi-
structures segmentation and diagnosis: Is the problem solved? IEEE TMI, 37(11):2514–2525,
2018.
[4] P. Bilic, P. F. Christ, E. Vorontsov, G. Chlebus, H. Chen, Q. Dou, C.-W. Fu, X. Han, P.-
A. Heng, J. Hesser, et al. The liver tumor segmentation benchmark (lits). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.04056ada, 2019.
[5] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille. Deeplab: Semantic image
segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs. IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 40(4):834–848, 2017.
[6] E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, D. Mane, V. Vasudevan, and Q. V. Le. Autoaugment: Learning augmenta-
tion strategies from data. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 113–123, 2019.
[7] J. De Fauw, J. R. Ledsam, B. Romera-Paredes, S. Nikolov, N. Tomasev, S. Blackwell, H. Askham,
X. Glorot, B. O’Donoghue, D. Visentin, et al. Clinically applicable deep learning for diagnosis
and referral in retinal disease. Nature medicine, 24(9):1342–1350, 2018.
[8] T. Elsken, J. H. Metzen, and F. Hutter. Neural architecture search: A survey. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 20(55):1–21, 2019.
[9] T. Falk, D. Mai, R. Bensch, Ö. Çiçek, A. Abdulkadir, Y. Marrakchi, A. Böhm, J. Deubner,
Z. Jäckel, K. Seiwald, et al. U-net: deep learning for cell counting, detection, and morphometry.
Nature methods, 16(1):67–70, 2019.
[10] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778,
2016.
[11] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual networks. In European
conference on computer vision, pages 630–645. Springer, 2016.
13
[12] L. Heinrich, J. Funke, C. Pape, J. Nunez-Iglesias, and S. Saalfeld. Synaptic cleft segmentation
in non-isotropic volume electron microscopy of the complete drosophila brain. In International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pages 317–325.
Springer, 2018.
[13] N. Heller, F. Isensee, K. H. Maier-Hein, X. Hou, C. Xie, F. Li, Y. Nan, G. Mu, Z. Lin, M. Han,
et al. The state of the art in kidney and kidney tumor segmentation in contrast-enhanced ct
imaging: Results of the kits19 challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01054, 2019.
[14] T. C. Hollon, B. Pandian, A. R. Adapa, E. Urias, A. V. Save, S. S. S. Khalsa, D. G. Eichberg,
R. S. D’Amico, Z. U. Farooq, S. Lewis, et al. Near real-time intraoperative brain tumor diagnosis
using stimulated raman histology and deep neural networks. Nature Medicine, pages 1–7, 2020.
[15] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger. Densely connected convolutional
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 4700–4708, 2017.
[16] F. Hutter, H. H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown. Sequential model-based optimization for general
algorithm conﬁguration. In International conference on learning and intelligent optimization,
pages 507–523. Springer, 2011.
[17] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
internal covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
[18] S. Jégou, M. Drozdzal, D. Vazquez, A. Romero, and Y. Bengio. The one hundred layers tiramisu:
Fully convolutional densenets for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pages 11–19, 2017.
[19] P. Kickingereder, F. Isensee, I. Tursunova, J. Petersen, U. Neuberger, D. Bonekamp, G. Brugnara,
M. Schell, T. Kessler, M. Foltyn, et al. Automated quantitative tumour response assessment of
mri in neuro-oncology with artiﬁcial neural networks: a multicentre, retrospective study. The
Lancet Oncology, 20(5):728–740, 2019.
[20] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Y. Bengio and
Y. LeCun, editors, 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San
Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.
[21] Y. LeCun. 1.1 deep learning hardware: Past, present, and future. In 2019 IEEE International
Solid-State Circuits Conference-(ISSCC), pages 12–19. IEEE, 2019.
[22] G. Litjens, T. Kooi, B. E. Bejnordi, A. A. A. Setio, F. Ciompi, M. Ghafoorian, J. A. Van
Der Laak, B. Van Ginneken, and C. I. Sánchez. A survey on deep learning in medical image
analysis. Medical image analysis, 42:60–88, 2017.
[23] L. Maier-Hein, M. Eisenmann, A. Reinke, S. Onogur, M. Stankovic, P. Scholz, T. Arbel,
H. Bogunovic, A. P. Bradley, A. Carass, et al. Why rankings of biomedical image analysis
competitions should be interpreted with care. Nature communications, 9(1):5217, 2018.
[24] R. McKinley, R. Meier, and R. Wiest. Ensembles of densely-connected cnns with label-
uncertainty for brain tumor segmentation. In International MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop, pages
456–465. Springer, 2018.
14
[25] B. H. Menze, A. Jakab, S. Bauer, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, K. Farahani, J. Kirby, Y. Burren, N. Porz,
J. Slotboom, R. Wiest, et al. The multimodal brain tumor image segmentation benchmark (brats).
IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 34(10):1993–2024, 2014.
[26] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi. V-net: Fully convolutional neural networks for
volumetric medical image segmentation. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pages
565–571. IEEE, 2016.
[27] U. Nestle, S. Kremp, A. Schaefer-Schuler, C. Sebastian-Welsch, D. Hellwig, C. Rübe, and C.-M.
Kirsch. Comparison of different methods for delineation of 18f-fdg pet–positive tissue for target
volume deﬁnition in radiotherapy of patients with non–small cell lung cancer. Journal of Nuclear
Medicine, 46(8):1342–1348, 2005.
[28] S. Nikolov, S. Blackwell, R. Mendes, J. De Fauw, C. Meyer, C. Hughes, H. Askham, B. Romera-
Paredes, A. Karthikesalingam, C. Chu, et al. Deep learning to achieve clinically applicable
segmentation of head and neck anatomy for radiotherapy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.04430,
2018.
[29] M. Nolden, S. Zelzer, A. Seitel, D. Wald, M. Müller, A. M. Franz, D. Maleike, M. Fangerau,
M. Baumhauer, L. Maier-Hein, et al. The medical imaging interaction toolkit: challenges and
advances. International journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery, 8(4):607–620, 2013.
[30] O. Oktay, J. Schlemper, L. L. Folgoc, M. Lee, M. Heinrich, K. Misawa, K. Mori, S. McDonagh,
N. Y. Hammerla, B. Kainz, et al. Attention u-net: learning where to look for the pancreas. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.03999, 2018.
[31] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation. In MICCAI, pages 234–241. Springer, 2015.
[32] A. L. Simpson, M. Antonelli, S. Bakas, M. Bilello, K. Farahani, B. van Ginneken, A. Kopp-
Schneider, B. A. Landman, G. Litjens, B. Menze, et al. A large annotated medical image dataset
for the development and evaluation of segmentation algorithmsdelldatagrowth. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.09063, 2019.
[33] D. Ulyanov, A. Vedaldi, and V. Lempitsky. Instance normalization: The missing ingredient for
fast stylization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.08022, 2016.
[34] M. Wiesenfarth, A. Reinke, B. A. Landman, M. J. Cardoso, L. Maier-Hein, and A. Kopp-
Schneider. Methods and open-source toolkit for analyzing and visualizing challenge results.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05121, 2019.
[35] Z. Wu, C. Shen, and A. v. d. Hengel. Bridging category-level and instance-level semantic image
segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.06885, 2016.
15
Methods
A quick overview of the nnU-Net design principles can be found in the Supplemental Material B.
This section provides detailed information on how these principles are implemented.
Dataset ﬁngerprints
As a ﬁrst processing step, nnU-Net crops the provided training cases to their
nonzero region. While this had no effect on most datasets in our experiments, it reduced the image
size of brain datasets such as D1 (Brain Tumor) and D15 (MSLes) substantially and thus improved
computational efﬁciency. Based on the cropped training data, nnU-Net creates a dataset ﬁngerprint
that captures all relevant parameters and properties: image sizes (i.e. number of voxels per spatial
dimension) before and after cropping, image spacings (i.e. the physical size of the voxels), modalities
(read from metadata) and number of classes for all images as well as the total number of training
cases. Furthermore, the ﬁngerprint includes the mean, standard deviation as well as the 0.5 and 99.5
percentiles of the intensity values in the foreground regions, i.e. the voxels belonging to any of the
class labels, computed over all training cases.
Pipeline ﬁngerprints
nnU-Net automizes the design of deep learning methods for biomedical im-
age segmentation by generating a so-called pipeline ﬁngerprint that contains all relevant information.
Importantly, nnU-Net reduces the design choices to the really essential ones and automatically infers
these choices using a set of heuristic rules. These rules condense the domain knowledge and operate
on the above-described data ﬁngerprint and the project-speciﬁc hardware constraints. These inferred
parameters are complemented by blueprint parameters, which are data-independent, and empirical
parameters, which are optimized during training.
Blueprint parameters
Architecture template: All U-Net architectures conﬁgured by nnU-Net
originate from the same template. This template closely follows the original U-Net [16] and its
3D counterpart [3]. According to our hypothesis that a well-conﬁgured plain U-Net is still hard to
beat, none of our U-Net conﬁgurations make use of recently proposed architectural variations such
as residual connections [6, 7], dense connections [10, 12], attention mechanisms [14], squeeze and
excitation [9] or dilated convolutions [2]. Minor changes with respect to the original architecture were
made: To enable large patch sizes, the batch size of the networks in nnU-Net is small. In fact, most
3D U-Net conﬁgurations were trained with a batch size of only 2 (see Supplementary Material Figure
E.1a). Batch normalization [11], which is often used to speed up or stabilize the training, does not
perform well with small batch sizes [20, 17]. We therefore use instance normalization [19] for all U-
Net models. Furthermore, we replace ReLU with leaky ReLUs [13] (negative slope 0.01). Networks
are trained with deep supervision: additional auxiliary losses are added in the decoder to all but the
two lowest resolutions, allowing gradients to be injected deeper into the network and facilitating the
training of all layers in the network. All U-Nets employ the very common conﬁguration of two blocks
per resolution step in both encoder and decoder, with each block consisting of a convolution, followed
by instance normalization and a leaky ReLU nonlinearity. Downsampling is implemented as strided
convolution (motivated by representational bottleneck, see [18]) and upsampling as convolution
transposed. As a tradeoff between performance and memory consumption, the initial number of
feature maps is set to 32 and doubled (halved) with each downsampling (upsampling) operation. To
limit the ﬁnal model size, the number of feature maps is additionally capped at 320 and 512 for 3D
and 2D U-Nets, respectively.
Training schedule: Based on experience and as a trade-off between runtime and reward, all networks
are trained for 1000 epochs with one epoch being deﬁned as iteration over 250 minibatches. Stochastic
16
gradient descent with nesterov momentum (µ = 0.99) and an initial learning rate of 0.01 is used for
learning network weights. The learning rate is decayed throughout the training following the ‘poly’
learning rate policy [2]: (1 −epoch/epochmax)0.9. The loss function is the sum of cross-entropy
and Dice loss [4]. For each deep supervision output, a corresponding downsampled ground truth
segmentation mask is used for loss computation. The training objective is the sum of the losses at
all resolutions: L = w1 · L1 + w2 · L2 + ... . Hereby, the weights halve with each decrease in
resolution, resulting in w2 = 1/2 · w1; w3 = 1/4 · w1, etc. and are normalized to sum to 1. Samples
for the mini batches are chosen from random training cases. Oversampling is implemented to ensure
robust handling of class imbalances: 66.7% of samples are from random locations within the selected
training case while 33.3% of patches are guaranteed to contain one of the foreground classes that
are present in the selected training sample (randomly selected). The number of foreground patches
is rounded with a forced minimum of 1 (resulting in 1 random and 1 foreground patch with batch
size 2). A variety of data augmentation techniques are applied on the ﬂy during training: rotations,
scaling, Gaussian noise, Gaussian blur, brightness, contrast, simulation of low resolution, gamma and
mirroring. Details are provided in Supplementary Information D.
Inference: Images are predicted with a sliding window approach, where the window size equals the
patch size used during training. Adjacent predictions overlap by half the size of a patch. The accuracy
of segmentation decreases towards the borders of the window. To suppress stitching artifacts and
reduce the inﬂuence of positions close to the borders, a Gaussian importance weighting is applied,
increasing the weight of the center voxels in the softmax aggregation. Test time augmentation by
mirroring along all axes is applied.
Inferred Parameters
Intensity normalization: There are two different image intensity normal-
ization schemes supported by nnU-Net. The default setting for all modalities except CT images is
z-scoring. For this option, during training and inference, each image is normalized independently
by subtracting its mean, followed by division with its standard deviation. If cropping resulted in
an average size decrease of 25% or more, a mask for central non-zero voxels is created and the
normalization is applied within that mask only, ignoring the surrounding zero voxels. For computed
tomography (CT) images, nnU-Net employs a different scheme, as intensity values are quantitative
and reﬂect physical properties of the tissue. It can therefore be beneﬁcial to retain this information by
using a global normalization scheme that is applied to all images. To this end, nnU-Net uses the 0.5
and 99.5 percentiles of the foreground voxels for clipping as well as the global foreground mean a
standard deviation for normalization on all images.
Resampling: In some datasets, particularly in the medical domain, the voxel spacing (the physical
space the voxels represent) is heterogeneous. Convolutional neural networks operate on voxel grids
and ignore this information. To cope with this heterogeneity, nnU-Net resamples all images to the
same target spacing (see paragraph below) using either third order spline, linear or nearest neighbor
interpolation. The default setting for image data is third order spline interpolation. For anisotropic
images (maximum axis spacing / minimum axis spacing > 3), in-plane resampling is done with third
order spline whereas out of plane interpolation is done with nearest neighbor. Treating the out of
plane axis differently in anisotropic cases suppresses resampling artifacts, as large contour changes
between slices are much more common. Segmentation maps are resampled by converting them to
one hot encodings. Each channel is then interpolated with linear interpolation and the segmentation
mask is retrieved by an argmax operation. Again, anisotropic cases are interpolated using “nearest
neighbor” on the low resolution axis.
17
Target spacing: The selected target spacing is a crucial parameter. Larger spacings result in smaller
images and thus a loss of details whereas smaller spacings result in larger images preventing the
network from accumulating sufﬁcient contextual information since the patch size is limited by the
given GPU memory budget. Although this tradeoff is in part addressed by the 3D U-Net cascade
(see below), a sensible target spacing for low and full resolution is still required. For the 3D full
resolution U-Net, nnU-Net uses the median value of the spacings found in the training cases computed
independently for each axis as default target spacing. For anisotropic datasets, this default can result in
severe interpolation artifacts or in a substantial loss of information due to large variances in resolution
across the training data. Therefore, the target spacing of the lowest resolution axis is selected to be
the 10th percentile of the spacings found in the training cases if both voxel and spacing anisotropy
(i.e. the ratio of lowest spacing axis to highest spacing axis) are larger than 3. For the 2D U-Net,
nnU-Net generally operates on the two axes with the highest resolution. If all three axes are isotropic,
the two trailing axes are utilized for slice extraction. The target spacing is the median spacing of the
training cases (computed independently for each axis). For slice-based processing, no resampling
along the out-of-plane axis is required.
Adaptation of network topology, patch size and batch size: Finding an appropriate U-Net architecture
conﬁguration is crucial for good segmentation performance. nnU-Net prioritizes large patch sizes
while remaining within a predeﬁned GPU memory budget. Larger patch sizes allow for more
contextual information to be aggregated and thus typically increase segmentation performance.
They come, however, at the cost of a decreased batch size which results in noisier gradients during
backpropagation. To improve the stability of the training, we require a minimum batch size of 2 and
choose a large momentum term for network training (see blueprint parameters). Image spacing is also
considered in the adaptation process: Downsampling operations may operate only on speciﬁc axes
and convolutional kernels in the 3D U-Nets can operate on certain image planes only (pseudo-2D).
The network topology for all U-Net conﬁgurations is chosen on basis of the median image size after
resampling as well as the target spacing the images were resampled to. A ﬂow chart for the adaptation
process is presented in the Supplements in Figure E.1. The adaptation of the architecture template,
which is described in more detail in the following, is computationally inexpensive. Due to the GPU
memory consumption estimate being based on feature map sizes, no GPU is required to run the
adaptation process.
Initialization: The patch size is initialized as the median image shape after resampling. If the patch
size is not divisible by 2nd for each axis, where nd is the number of downsampling operations, it is
padded accordingly.
Architecture topology: The architecture is conﬁgured by determining the number of downsampling
operations along each axis depending on the patch size and voxel spacing. Downsampling is
performed until further downsampling would reduce the feature map size to smaller than 4 voxels or
the feature map spacings become anisotropic. The downsampling strategy is determined by the voxel
spacing: high resolution axes are downsampled separately until their resolution is within factor 2 of
the lower resolution axis. Subsequently, all axes are downsampled simultaneously. Downsampling is
terminated for each axis individually, once the respective feature map constraint is triggered. The
default kernel size for convolutions is 3 × 3 × 3 and 3 × 3 for 3D U-Net and 2D U-Net, respectively.
If there is an initial resolution discrepancy between axes (deﬁned as a spacing ratio larger than 2), the
kernel size for the out-of-plane axis is set to 1 until the resolutions are within a factor of 2. Note that
the convolutional kernel size then remains at 3 for all axes.
18
Adaptation to GPU memory budget: The largest possible patch size during conﬁguration is limited
by the amount of GPU memory. Since the patch size is initialized to the median image shape after
resampling, it is initially too large to ﬁt into the GPU for most datasets. nnU-Net estimates the
memory consumption of a given architecture based on the size of the feature maps in the network,
comparing it to reference values of known memory consumption. The patch size is then reduced in
an iterative process while updating the architecture conﬁguration accordingly in each step until the
required budget is reached (see Figure E.1 in the Supplements). The reduction of the patch size is
always applied to the largest axis relative to the median image shape of the data. The reduction in
one step amounts to 2nd voxels of that axis, where nd is the number of downsampling operations.
Batch size: As a ﬁnal step, the batch size is conﬁgured. If a reduction of patch size was performed
the batch size is set to 2. Otherwise, the remaining GPU memory headroom is utilized to increase the
batch size until the GPU is fully utilized. To prevent overﬁtting, the batch size is capped such that the
total number of voxels in the minibatch do not exceed 5% of the total number of voxels of all training
cases. Examples for generated U-Net architectures are presented in Supplementary Information C.1
and C.2.
Conﬁguration of 3D U-Net cascade: Running a segmentation model on downsampled data increases
the size of patches in relation to the image and thus enables the network to accumulate more contextual
information. This comes at the cost of a reduction in details in the generated segmentations and
may also cause errors if the segmentation target is very small or characterized by its texture. In a
hypothetical scenario with unlimited GPU memory, it is thus generally favored to train models at
full resolution with a patch size that covers the entire image. The 3D U-Net cascade approximates
this approach by ﬁrst running a 3D U-Net on downsampled images and then training a second, full
resolution 3D U-Net to reﬁne the segmentation maps of the former. This way, the “global”, low
resolution network utilizes maximal contextual information to generate its segmentation output,
which then serves as an additional input channel that guides the second, “local” U-Net. The cascade
is triggered only for datasets where the patch size of the 3d full resolution U-Net covers less than
12.5% of the median image shape. If this is the case, the target spacing for the downsampled data
and the architecture of the associated 3D low resolution U-Net are conﬁgured jointly in an iterative
process. The target spacing is initialized as the target spacing of the full resolution data. In order
for the patch size to cover a large proportion of the input image, the target spacing is then increased
stepwise by 1% while updating the architecture conﬁguration accordingly in each step until the patch
size of the resulting network topology surpasses 25% of the current median image shape. If the
current spacing is anisotropic (factor 2 difference between lowest and highest resolution axis), only
the spacing of the higher resolution axes is increased. The conﬁguration of the second 3D U-Net of
the cascade is identical to the standalone 3D U-Net for which the conﬁguration process is described
above (except that the upsampled segmentation maps of the ﬁrst U-Net are concatenated to its input).
Figure E.1b in the Supplements provides an overview of this optimization process.
Empirical parameters
Ensembling and selection of U-Net conﬁguration(s): nnU-Net automat-
ically determines which (ensemble of) conﬁguration(s) to use for inference based on the average
foreground Dice coefﬁcient computed via cross-validation on the training data. The selected model(s)
can be either a single U-Net (2D, 3D full resolution, 3D low resolution or the full resolution U-Net of
the cascade) or an ensemble of any two of these conﬁgurations. Models are ensembled by averaging
softmax probabilities.
19
Postprocessing: Connected component-based postprocessing is commonly used in medical image
segmentation [1, 8]. Especially in organ segmentation it often helps to remove spurious false positive
detections by removing all but the largest connected component. nnU-Net follows this assumption
and automatically benchmarks the effect of suppressing smaller components on the cross-validation
results. First, all foreground classes are treated as one component. If suppression of all but the largest
region improves the average foreground Dice coefﬁcient and does not reduce the Dice coefﬁcient
for any of the classes, this procedure is selected as the ﬁrst postprocessing step. Finally, nnU-Net
builds on the outcome of this step and decides whether the same procedure should be performed for
individual classes.
Implementation details
nnU-Net is implemented in Python utilizing the PyTorch [15] framework.
The Batchgenerators library [5] is used for data augmentation. For reduction of computational
burden and GPU memory footprint, mixed precision training is implemented with Nvidia Apex/Amp
(https://github.com/NVIDIA/apex). For use as a framework, the source code is available
on GitHub (https://github.com/MIC-DKFZ/nnUNet). Users who seek to use nnU-Net as a
standardized benchmark or to run inference with our pretrained models can install nnU-Net via PyPI.
For a full description of how to use nnU-Net, please refer to the online documentation available on
the GitHub page.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked
to this article.
Code availability
The nnU-Net repository is available at: https://github.com/mic-dkfz/nnunet. Pre-traiend
models for all datasets utilized in this study are available for download at https://zenodo.org/
record/3734294.
Data availability
All 19 datasets used in this study are publicly available. References for web access as well as key
data properties can be found in the Supplementary Material A and F.
References
[1] P. Bilic, P. F. Christ, E. Vorontsov, G. Chlebus, H. Chen, Q. Dou, C.-W. Fu, X. Han, P.-
A. Heng, J. Hesser, et al. The liver tumor segmentation benchmark (lits). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.04056ada, 2019.
[2] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille. Deeplab: Semantic
image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs.
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 40(4):834–848, 2017.
[3] Ö. Çiçek, A. Abdulkadir, S. S. Lienkamp, T. Brox, and O. Ronneberger. 3d u-net: learning
dense volumetric segmentation from sparse annotation. In International conference on medical
image computing and computer-assisted intervention, pages 424–432. Springer, 2016.
20
[4] M. Drozdzal, E. Vorontsov, G. Chartrand, S. Kadoury, and C. Pal. The importance of skip
connections in biomedical image segmentation. In Deep Learning and Data Labeling for
Medical Applications, pages 179–187. Springer, 2016.
[5] I. Fabian, J. Paul, W. Jakob, Z. David, P. Jens, K. Simon, S. Justus, K. Andre, R. Tobias,
W. Sebastian, N. Peter, D. Stefan, K. Gregor, and M.-H. Klaus. batchgenerators - a python
framework for data augmentation, Jan. 2020.
[6] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–
778, 2016.
[7] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual networks. In European
conference on computer vision, pages 630–645. Springer, 2016.
[8] N. Heller, F. Isensee, K. H. Maier-Hein, X. Hou, C. Xie, F. Li, Y. Nan, G. Mu, Z. Lin, M. Han,
et al. The state of the art in kidney and kidney tumor segmentation in contrast-enhanced ct
imaging: Results of the kits19 challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01054, 2019.
[9] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun. Squeeze-and-excitation networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 7132–7141, 2018.
[10] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger. Densely connected convolutional
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 4700–4708, 2017.
[11] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
internal covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
[12] S. Jégou, M. Drozdzal, D. Vazquez, A. Romero, and Y. Bengio. The one hundred layers
tiramisu: Fully convolutional densenets for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pages 11–19, 2017.
[13] A. L. Maas, A. Y. Hannun, and A. Y. Ng. Rectiﬁer nonlinearities improve neural network
acoustic models. In Proc. icml, volume 30, page 3, 2013.
[14] O. Oktay, J. Schlemper, L. L. Folgoc, M. Lee, M. Heinrich, K. Misawa, K. Mori, S. McDonagh,
N. Y. Hammerla, B. Kainz, et al. Attention u-net: learning where to look for the pancreas. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.03999, 2018.
[15] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin,
N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 8024–8035, 2019.
[16] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation. In MICCAI, pages 234–241. Springer, 2015.
[17] S. Singh and S. Krishnan. Filter response normalization layer: Eliminating batch dependence in
the training of deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.09737, 2019.
[18] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna. Rethinking the inception archi-
tecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 2818–2826, 2016.
21
[19] D. Ulyanov, A. Vedaldi, and V. Lempitsky. Instance normalization: The missing ingredient for
fast stylization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.08022, 2016.
[20] Y. Wu and K. He. Group normalization. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 3–19, 2018.
22
Supplementary Information
This document contains supplementary information for the manuscript ’Automated Design
of Deep Learning Methods for Biomedical Image Segmentation’.
A
Dataset details
Table A provides an overview of the datasets used in this manuscript including respective references
for data access. The numeric values presented here are computed based on the training cases for each
of these datasets. They are the basis of the dataset ﬁngerprints presented in Figure 5.
ID
Dataset Name
Associated
Challenges
Modalities
Median Shape
(Spacing [mm])
N
Classes
Rarest
Class Ratio
N Training
Cases
Segmentation Tasks
D1
Brain Tumour
[15], [14]
MRI (T1, T1c,
T2, FLAIR)
138x169x138
(1, 1, 1)
3
7.310−3
484
edema, active tumor,
necrosis
D2
Heart
[15]
MRI
115x320x232
(1.37, 1.25, 1.25)
1
4.010−3
20
left ventricle
D3
Liver
[15], [2]
CT
432x512x512
(1, 0.77, 0.77)
2
2.610−2
131
liver, liver tumors
D4
Hippocampus
[15]
MRI
36x50x35
(1, 1, 1)
2
2.710−2
260
anterior and posterior
hippocampus
D5
Prostate
[15]
MRI
(T2, ADC)
20x320x319
(3.6, 0.62, 0.62)
2
5.410−3
32
peripheral and
transition zone
D6
Lung
[15]
CT
252x512x512
(1.24, 0.79, 0.79)
1
3.910−4
63
lung nodules
D7
Pancreas
[15]
CT
93x512x512
(2.5, 0.80, 0.80)
2
2.010−3
282
pancreas, pancreas
cancer
D8
HepaticVessel
[15]
CT
49x512x512
(5, 0.80, 0.80)
2
1.110−3
303
hepatic vessels,
tumors
D9
Spleen
[15]
CT
90x512x512
(5, 0.79, 0.79)
1
4.710−3
41
spleen
D10
Colon
[15]
CT
95x512x512
(5, 0.78, 0.78)
1
5.610−4
126
colon cancer
D11
AbdOrgSeg
[12]
CT
128x512x512
(3, 0.76, 0.76)
13
4.410−3
30
13 abdominal
organs
D12
Promise
[13]
MRI
24x320x320
(3.6, 0.61, 0.61)
1
2.010−2
50
prostate
D13
ACDC
[1]
cine MRI
9x256x216
(10, 1.56, 1.56)
3
1.210−2
200
(100x2) *
left ventricle, right
ventricle,
myocardium
D14
LiTS **
[2]
CT
432x512x512
(1, 0.77, 0.77)
2
2.610−2
131
liver, liver tumors
D15
MSLesion
[4]
MRI (FLAIR,
MPRAGE, PD,
T2)
137x180x137
(1, 1, 1)
1
1.710−3
42
(21x2) *
multiple sclerosis
lesions
D16
CHAOS
[11]
MRI
30x204x256
(9, 1.66, 1.66)
4
3.310−2
60
(20 + 20x2) *
liver, spleen, left and
right kidney
D17
KiTS
[7]
CT
107x512x512
(3, 0.78, 0.78)
2
7.510−3
206
kidney, kidney
tumor
D18
SegTHOR
[16]
CT
178x512x512
(2.5, 0.98, 0.98)
4
4.610−4
40
heart, aorta,
esophagus, trachea
D19
CREMI
[6]
Electron
Microscopy
125x1250x1250
(40, 4, 4)
1
5.210−3
3
synaptic clefts
* multiple annotated examples per training case
** almost identical to Decathlon Liver; Decathlon changed the training cases and test set slightly
Table A.1: Overview over the challenge datasets used in this manuscript.
23
B
nnU-Net Design Principles
Here we present a brief overview of the design principles of nnU-Net on a conceptual level. Please
refer to the online methods for a more detailed information on how these guidelines are implemented.
B.1
Blueprint Parameters
• Architecture Design decisions:
– U-Net like architectures enable state of the art segmentation when the pipeline is
well-conﬁgured. According to our experience, sophisticated architectural variations are
not required to achieve state of the art performance.
– Our architectures only use plain convolutions, instance normalization and Leaky non-
linearities. The order of operations in each computational block is conv - instance norm
- leaky ReLU.
– We use two computational blocks per resolution stage in both encoder and decoder.
– Downsampling is done with strided convolutions (the convolution of the ﬁrst block of
the new resolution has stride >1), upsampling is done with convolutions transposed.
We should note that we did not observe substantial disparities in segmentation accuracy
between this approach and alternatives (e.g. max pooling, bi/trilinear upsampling).
• Selecting the best U-Net conﬁguration: It is difﬁcult to estimate which U-Net conﬁguration
performs best on what dataset. To address this, nnU-Net designs three separate conﬁgurations
and automatically chooses the best one based on cross-validation (see inferred parameters).
Predicting which conﬁgurations should be trained on which dataset is a future research
direction.
– 2D U-Net: Runs on full resolution data. Expected to work well on anisotropic data,
such as D5 (Prostate MRI) and D13 (ACDC, cine MRI) (for dataset references see
Table A).
– 3D full resolution U-Net: Runs on full resolution data. Patch size is limited by
availability of GPU memory. Is overall the best performing conﬁguration (see results
in F). For large data, however, the patch size may be too small to aggregate sufﬁcient
contextual information.
– 3D U-Net cascade: Speciﬁcally targeted towards large data. First, coarse segmentation
maps are learned by a 3D U-Net that operates on low resolution data. These segmen-
tation maps are then reﬁned by a second 3D U-Net that operates on full resolution
data.
• Training Scheme
– All trainings run for a ﬁxed length of 1000 epochs, where each epoch is deﬁned as 250
training iterations (using the batch size conﬁgured by nnU-Net). Shorter trainings than
this default empirically result in diminished segmentation performance.
– As for the opimizer, stochastic gradient descent with a high initial learning rate (0.01)
and a large nesterov momentum (0.99) empirically provided the best results. The
learning rate is reduced during the training using the ’polyLR’ schedule as described in
[5], which is an almost linear decrease to 0.
– Data augmentation is essential to achieve state of the art performance. It is important
to run the augmentations on the ﬂy and with associated probabilities to obtain a never
ending stream of unique examples (see Section D for details).
24
– Data in the biomedical domain suffers from class imbalance. Rare classes could end
up being ignored because they are underrepresented during training. Oversampling
foreground regions addresses this issue reliably. It should, however, not be overdone so
that the network also sees all the data variability of the background.
– The Dice loss function is well suited to address the class imbalance, but comes with
its own drawbacks. Dice loss optimizes the evaluation metric directly, but due to the
patch based training, in practice merely approximates it. Furthermore, oversampling
of classes skews the class distribution seen during training. Empirically, combining
the Dice loss with a cross-entropy loss improved training stability and segmentation
accuracy. Therefore, the two loss terms are simply averaged.
• Inference
– Validation sets of all folds in the cross-validation are predicted by the single model
trained on the respective training data. The 5 models resulting from training on 5
individual folds are subsequently used as an ensemble for predicting test cases.
– Inference is done patch based with the same patch size as used during training. Fully
convolutional inference is not recommended because it causes issues with zero-padded
convolutions and instance normalization.
– To prevent stitching artifacts, adjacent predictions are done with a distance of patch_size
/ 2. Predictions towards the border are less accurate, which is why we use Gaussian
importance weighting for softmax aggregation (the center voxels are weighted higher
then the border voxels).
B.2
Inferred Parameters
These parameters are not ﬁxed across datasets, but conﬁgured on-the-ﬂy by nnU-Net according to the
data ﬁngerprint (low dimensional representation of dataset properties) of the task at hand.
• Dynamic Network adaptation:
– The network architecture needs to be adapted to the size and spacing of the input
patches seen during training. This is necessary to ensure that the receptive ﬁeld of the
network covers the entire input.
– We perform downsampling until the feature maps are relatively small (minimum is
4 × 4(×4)) to ensure sufﬁcient context aggregation.
– Due to having a ﬁxed number of blocks per resolution step in both the encoder and
decoder, the network depth is coupled to its input patch size. The number of convolu-
tional layers in the network (excluding segmentation layers) is (5 ∗k + 2) where k is
the number of downsampling operations (5 per downsampling stems from 2 convs in
the encoder, 2 in the decoder plus the convolution transpose).
– Additional loss functions are applied to all but the two lowest resolutions of the decoder
to inject gradients deep into the network.
– For anisotropic data, pooling is ﬁrst exclusively performed in-plane until the resolution
matches between the axes. Initially, 3D convolutions use a kernel size of 1 (making
them effectively 2D convolutions) in the out of plane axis to prevent aggregation of
information across distant slices. Once an axes becomes too small, downsampling is
stopped individually for this axis.
• Conﬁguration of the input patch size:
25
– Should be as large as possible while still allowing a batch size of 2 (under a given GPU
memory constraint). This maximizes the context available for decision making in the
network.
– Aspect ratio of patch size follows the median shape (in voxels) of resampled training
cases.
• Batch size:
– Batch size is conﬁgured with a minimum of 2 to ensure robust optimization, since
noise in gradients increases with fewer sample in the minibatch.
– If GPU memory headroom is available after patch size conﬁguration, the batch size is
increased until GPU memory is maxed out.
• Target spacing and resampling:
– For isotropic data, the median spacing of training cases (computed independently
for each axis) is set as default. Resampling with third order spline (data) and linear
interpolation (one hot encoded segmentation maps such as training annotations) give
good results.
– For anisotropic data, the target spacing in the out of plane axis should be smaller than
the median, resulting in higher resolution in order to reduce resampling artifacts. To
achieve this we set the target spacing as the 10th percentile of the spacings found for
this axis in the training cases. Resampling across the out of plane axis is done with
nearest neighbor for both data and one-hot encoded segmentation maps.
• Intensity normalization:
– Z-score per image (mean substraction and division by standard deviation) is a good
default.
– We deviate from this default only for CT images, where a global normalization scheme
is determined based on the intensities found in foreground voxels across all training
cases.
B.3
Empirical Parameters
Some parameters cannot be inferred by simply looking at the dataset ﬁngerprint of the training cases.
These are determined empirically by monitoring validation performance after training.
• Model selection: While the 3D full resolution U-Net shows overall best performance,
selection of the best model for a speciﬁc task at hand can not be predicted with perfect
accuracy. Therefore, nnU-Net generates three U-Net conﬁgurations and automatically picks
the best performing method (or ensemble of methods) after cross-validation.
• Postprocessing: Often, particularly in medical data, the image contains only one instance
of the target structure. This prior knowledge can often be exploited by running connected
component analysis on the predicted segmentation maps and removing all but the largest
component. Whether to apply this postprocessing is determined by monitoring validation
performance after cross-validation. Speciﬁcally, postprocessing is triggered for individual
classes where the Dice score is improved by removing all but the largest component.
26
Figure C.1: Network architectures generated by nnU-Net for the ACDC dataset (D13)
C
Analysis of exemplary nnU-Net-generated pipelines
In this section we brieﬂy introduce the pipelines generated by nnU-Net for D13 (ACDC) and D14
(LiTS) to create an intuitive understanding of nnU-Nets design principles and the motivation behind
them.
C.1
ACDC
Figure C.1 provides a summary of the pipelines that were automatically generated by nnU-Net for
this dataset.
Dataset Description
The Automated Cardiac Diagnosis Challenge (ACDC) [1] was hosted by
MICCAI in 2017. Since then it is running as an open challenge with data and current leaderboard
available at https://acdc.creatis.insa-lyon.fr. In the segmentation part of the challenge,
participating teams were asked to generate algorithms for segmenting the right ventricle, the left
myocardium and the left ventricular cavity from cine MRI. For each patient, reference segmentations
for two time steps within the cardiac cycle were provided. With 100 training patients, this amounts to
a total of 200 annotated images. One key property of cine MRI is that slice acquisition takes place
across multiple cardiac cycles and breath holds. This results in a limited number of slices and thus a
low out of plane resolution as well as the possibility for slice misalignments. Figure C.1 provides a
summary of the pipelines that were automatically generated by nnU-Net for this dataset. The typical
27
image shape (here the median image size is computed for each axis independently) is 9 × 237 × 256
voxels at a spacing of 10 × 1.56 × 1.56 mm.
Intensity Normalization
With the images being MRI, nnU-Net normalizes all images individually
by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation.
2D U-Net
As target spacing for the in-plane resolution, 1.56 × 1.56 mm is determined. This is
identical for the 2D and the 3D full resolution U-Net. Due to the 2D U-Net operating on slices only,
the out of plane resolution for this conﬁguration is not altered and remains heterogeneous within the
training set. The 2D U-Net is conﬁgured as described in the Online Methods 4 to have a patch size of
256 × 224 voxels, which fully covers the typical image shape after in-plane resampling (237 × 208).
3D U-Net The size and spacing anisotropy of this dataset causes the out-of-plane target spacing
of the 3D full resolution U-Net to be selected as 5mm, corresponding to the 10th percentile of the
spacings found in the training cases. In datasets such as ACDC, the segmentation contour can change
substantially between slices due to the large slice to slice distance. Choosing the target spacing
to be lower results in more images that are upsampled for U-Net training and then downsampled
for the ﬁnal segmentation export. Preferring this variant over the median causes more images to
be downsampled for training and then upsampled for segmentation export and therefore reduces
interpolation artifacts substantially. Also note that resampling the out of plane axis is done with
nearest neighbor interpolation.The median image shape after resampling for the 3D full resolution
U-Net is 18 × 237 × 208 voxels. As described in the Online Methods 4 nnU-Net conﬁgures a patch
size of 20 × 256 × 224 for network training, which ﬁts into the memory budget with a batch size of 3.
Note how the convolutional kernel sizes in the 3D U-Net start with (1 × 3 × 3) which is effectively a
2D convolution for the initial layers (see also Figure C.1). The reasoning behind this is that due to the
large discrepancy in voxel spacing, too many changes are expected across slices and the aggregation
of imaging information may therefore not be beneﬁcial. Similarly, pooling is done in-plane only
(conv kernel stride (1, 2, 2)) until the spacing between in-plane and out-of-plane axes are within a
factor of 2. Only after the spacings approximately match the pooling and the convolutional kernel
sizes become isotropic.
3D U-Net
cascade Since the 3D U-Net already covers the whole median image shape, the U-Net
cascade is not necessary and therefore omitted.
Training and Postprocessing
During training, spatial augmentations for the 3D U-Net (such as
scaling and rotation) are done in-plane only to prevent resampling of imaging information across
slices which would cause interpolation artifacts. Each U-Net conﬁguration is trained in a ﬁve-fold
cross-validation on the training cases. Note that we interfere with the splits in order to ensure that
patients are properly stratiﬁed (since there are two images per patient). Thanks to the cross-validation,
nnU-Net can use the entire training set for validation and ensembling. To this end, the validation splits
of each of the ﬁve fold are aggregated. nnU-Net evaluates the performance (ensemble of models or
single conﬁguration) by averaging the Dice scores over all foreground classes and cases, resulting in a
single scalar value. Detailed results are omitted here for brevity (they are presented in Supplementary
Information F). Based on this evaluation scheme, the 2D U-Net obtains a score of 0.9165, the 3D full
resolution a score of 0.9181 and the ensemble of the two a score of 0.9228. Therefore the ensemble
is selected for predicting the test cases. Postprocessing is conﬁgured on the segmentation maps of
the ensemble. Removing all but the largest connected component was found beneﬁcial for the right
ventricle and the left ventricular cavity.
28
C.2
LiTS
Figure C.2 provides a summary of the pipelines that were automatically generated by nnU-Net for
this dataset.
Dataset Description
The Liver and Liver Tumor Segmentation challenge (LiTS) [2] was hosted by
MICCAI in 2017. Due to the large, high quality dataset it provides, the challenge plays an important
role in concurrent research. The challenge is hosted at https://competitions.codalab.org/
competitions/17094. The segmentation task in LiTS is the segmentation of the liver and liver
tumors in abdominal CT scans. The challenge provides 131 training cases with reference annotations.
The test set has a size of 70 cases and the reference annotations are known only to the challenge
organizers. The median image shape of the training cases is 432 × 512 × 512 voxels with a
corresponding voxel spacing of 1 × 0.77 × 0.77 mm.
Intensity Normalization
Voxel intensities in CT scans are linked to quantitative physical properties
of the tissue. The intensities are therefore expected to be consistent between scanners. nnU-Net
leverages this consistency by applying a global intensity normalization scheme (as opposed to
ACDC in Supplementary Information C.1, where cases are normalized individually using their mean
and standard deviation). To this end, nnU-Net extracts intensity information as part of the dataset
ﬁngerprint: the intensities of the voxels belonging to any of the foreground classes (liver and liver
tumor) are collected across all training cases. Then, the mean and standard deviations of these values
as well as their 0.5 and 99.5 percentiles are computed. Subsequently, all images are normalized by
clipping them to the 0.5 and 99.5 percentiles, followed by subtraction of the global mean and division
by the global standard deviation.
2D U-Net
The target spacing for the 2D U-Net is determined to be NA × 0.77 × 0.77 mm, which
corresponds to the median voxel spacing encountered in the training cases. Note that the 2D U-Net
operates on slices only, so the out of plane axis is left untouched. Resampling the training cases
results in a median image shape of NA × 512 × 512 voxels (we indicate by NA that this axis is not
resampled). Since this is the median shape, cases in the training set can be smaller or larger than that.
The 2D U-Net is conﬁgured to have an input patch size of 512 × 512 voxels and a batch size of 12.
3D U-Net
The target spacing for the 3D U-Net is determined to be 1 × 0.77 × 0.77 mm,
which corresponds to the median voxel spacing. Because the median spacing is nearly isotropic,
nnU-Net does not use the 10th percentile for the out of plane axis as was the case for ACDC
(see Supplementary Information C.1). The resampling strategy is decided on a per-image basis.
Isotropic cases (maximum axis spacing / minimum axis spacing < 3) are resampled with third order
spline interpolation for the image data and linear interpolation for the segmentations. Note that
segmentation maps are always converted into a one hot representation prior to resampling which
is converted back to a segmentation map after the interpolation. For anisotropic images, nnU-Net
resamples the out-of-plane axis separately, as was done in ACDC.
After resampling, the median image shape is 482 × 512 × 512.
nnU-Net prioritizes a large
patch size over a large batch size (note that these are coupled under a given GPU memory budget) to
capture as much contextual information as possible. The 3D U-Net is thus conﬁgured to have a patch
size of 128 × 128 × 128 voxels and a batch size of 2, which is the minimum allowed according to
29
Figure C.2: Network architectures generated by nnU-Net for the LiTS dataset (D14)
30
nnU-Net heuristics. Since The input patches have nearly isotropic spacing, all convolutional kernel
sizes and downsampling strides are isotropic (3 × 3 × 3 and 2 × 2 × 2, respectively).
3D U-Net cascade
Although nnU-Net prioritizes large input patches, the patch size of the 3D full
resolution U-Net is too small to capture sufﬁcient contextual information (it only covers 1/60 of the
voxels of the median image shape after resampling). This can cause misclassiﬁcations of voxels
because the patches are too ‘zoomed in’, making for instance the distinction between the spleen
and the liver particularly hard. The 3D U-Net cascade is designed to tackle this problem by ﬁrst
training a 3D U-Net on downsampled data and then reﬁning the low-resolution segmentation output
with a second U-Net that operates as full resolution. Using the process described in the Online
Methods 4 as well as Figure E.1 b), the target spacing for the low resolution U-Net is determined to
be 2.47 × 1.9 × 1.9 mm, resulting in a median image shape of 195 × 207 × 207 voxels. The 3D low
resolution operates on 128 × 128 × 128 patches with a batch size of 2. Note that while this setting is
identical to the 3D U-Net conﬁguration here, this is not necessarily the case for other datasets. If the
3D full resolution U-Net data was anisotropic, nnU-Net would prioritize to downsample the higher
resolution axes ﬁrst resulting in a deviating network architecture, patch size and batch size. After
ﬁve-fold cross-validation of the 3D low resolution U-Net, the segmentation maps of the respective
validation sets are upsampled to the target spacing of the 3D full resolution U-Net. The full resolution
U-Net of the cascade (which has an identical conﬁguration to the regular 3D full resolution U-Net) is
then trained to reﬁne the coarse segmentation maps and correct any errors it encounters. This is done
by concatenating a one hot encoding of the upsampled segmentations to the input of the network.
Training and Postprocessing
All network conﬁgurations are trained as ﬁve fold cross-validation.
nnU-Net again evaluates all conﬁgurations by computing the average Dice score across all foreground
classes, resulting in a scalar metric per conﬁguration. Based on this evaluation scheme, the scores are
0.7625 for the 2D U-Net, 0.8044 for the 3D full resolution U-Net, 0.7796 for the 3D low resolution
U-Net and 0.8017 for the full resolution 3D U-Net of the cascade. The best combination of two
models was identiﬁed as the one between the low and full resolution U-Nets with a score of 0.8111.
Postprocessing is conﬁgured on the segmentation maps of this ensemble. Removing all but the largest
connected component was found beneﬁcial for the combined foreground region (union of liver and
liver tumor label) as well as for the liver label alone, as both resulted in small performance gains
when empirically testing it on the training data.
D
Details on nnU-Net’s Data Augmentation
A variety of data augmentation techniques is applied during training. All augmentations are computed
on the ﬂy on the CPU using background workers. The data augmentation pipeline is implemented
with the publicly available batchgenerators framework 2. nnU-Net does not vary the parameters of
the data augmentation pipeline between datasets.
Sampled patches are initially larger than the patch size used for training.
This results in
less out of boundary values (here 0) being introduced during data augmentation when rotation and
scaling is applied. As a part of the rotation and scaling augmentation, patches are center-cropped to
the ﬁnal target patch size. To ensure that the borders of original images appear in the ﬁnal patches,
preliminary crops may initially extend outside the boundary of the image.
2https://github.com/MIC-DKFZ/batchgenerators
31
Spatial augmentations (rotation, scaling, low resolution simulation) are applied in 3D for
the 3D U-Nets and applied in 2D when training the 2D U-Net or a 3D U-Net with anisotropic patch
size. A patch size is considered anisotropic if the largest edge length of the patch size is at least three
times larger than the smallest.
To increase the variability in generated patches, most augmentations are varied with param-
eters drawn randomly from predeﬁned ranges. In this context, x ∼U(a, b) indicates that x was
drawn from a uniform distribution between a and b. Furthermore, all augmentations are applied
stochastically according to a predeﬁned probability.
The following augmentations are applied by nnU-Net (in the given order):
1. Rotation and Scaling. Scaling and rotation are applied together for improved speed of
computation. This approach reduces the amount of required data interpolations to one.
Scaling and rotation are applied with a probability of 0.2 each (resulting in probabilities of
0.16 for only scaling, 0.16 for only rotation and 0.08 for both being triggered). If processing
isotropic 3D patches, the angles of rotation (in degrees) αx, αy and αz are each drawn
from U(−30, 30). If a patch is anisotropic or 2D, the angle of rotation is sampled from
U(−180, 180). If the 2D patch size is anisotropic, the angle is sampled from U(−15, 15).
Scaling is implemented via multiplying coordinates with a scaling factor in the voxel grid.
Thus, scale factors smaller than one result in a "zoom out" effect while values larger one
result in a "zoom in" effect. The scaling factor is sampled from U(0.7, 1.4) for all patch
types.
2. Gaussian Noise. Zero centered additive Gaussian noise is added to each voxel in the sample
independently. This augmentation is applied with a probability of 0.15. The variance of the
noise is drawn from U(0, 0.1) (note that the voxel intensities in all samples are close to zero
mean and unit variance due to intensity normalization).
3. Gaussian Blur. Blurring is applied with a probability of 0.2 per sample. If this augmentation
is triggered in a sample, blurring is applied with a probability of 0.5 for each of the
associated modalities (resulting in a combined probability of only 0.1 for samples with a
single modality). The width (in voxels) of the Gaussian kernel σ is sampled from U(0.5, 1.5)
independently for each modality.
4. Brightness. Voxel intensities are multiplied by x ∼U(0.7, 1.3) with a probability of 0.15.
5. Contrast. Voxel intensities are multiplied by x ∼U(0.65, 1.5) with a probability of 0.15.
Following multiplication, the values are clipped to their original value range.
6. Simulation of low resolution. This augmentation is applied with a probability of 0.25 per
sample and 0.5 per associated modality. Triggered modalities are downsampled by a factor
of U(1, 2) using nearest neighbor interpolation and then sampled back up to their original
size with cubic interpolation. For 2D patches or anisotropic 3D patches, this augmentation
is applied only in 2D leaving the out of plane axis (if applicable) in its original state.
7. Gamma augmentation. This augmentation is applied with a probability of 0.15. The
patch intensities are scaled to a factor of [0, 1] of their respective value range. Then, a
nonlinear intensity transformation is applied per voxel: inew = iγ
old with γ ∼U(0.7, 1.5).
The voxel intensities are subsequently scaled back to their original value range. With a
32
probability of 0.15, this augmentation is applied with the voxel intensities being inverted
prior to transformation: (1 −inew) = (1 −iold)γ.
8. Mirroring. All patches are mirrored with a probability of 0.5 along all axes.
For the full resolution U-Net of the U-net cascade, nnU-Net additionally applies the following
augmentations to the segmentation masks generated by the low resolution 3D U-net. Note that the
segmentations are stored as one hot encoding.
1. Binary Operators. With probability 0.4, a binary operator is applied to all labels in the
predicted masks. This operator is randomly chosen from [dilation, erosion, opening, closing].
The structure element is a sphere with radius r ∼U(1, 8). The operator is applied to the
labels in random order. Hereby, the one hot encoding property is retained. Dilation of one
label, for example, will result in removal of all other labels in the dilated area.
2. Removal of Connected Components. With probability 0.2, connected components that
are smaller than 15% of the patch size are removed from the one hot encoding.
E
Network Architecture Conﬁguration
Figure E.1 serves as a visual aid for the iterative process of architecture conﬁguration described in
the online methods.
F
Summary of nnU-Net Challenge Participations
In this section we provide details of all challenge participations.
In some participations, manual intervention regarding the format of input data or the cross-validation
data splits was required for compatibility with nnU-Net. For each dataset, we disclose all manual
interventions in this section. The most common cause for manual intervention was training cases that
were related to each other (such as multiple time points of the same patient) and thus required to be
separated for mutual exclusivity between data splits. A detailed description of how to perform this
intervention is further provided along with the source code.
For each dataset, we run all applicable nnU-Net conﬁgurations (2D, 3D fullres, 3D lowres,
3D cascade) in 5-fold cross-validation. All models are trained from scratch without pretraining and
trained only on the provided training data of the challenge without external training data. Note that
other participants may be using external data in some competitions. For each dataset, nnU-Net
subsequently identiﬁes the ideal conﬁguration(s) based on cross-validation and ensembling. Finally,
The best conﬁguration is used to predict the test cases.
The pipeline generated by nnU-Net is provided for each dataset in the compact representa-
tion described in Section F.2. We furthermore provide a table containing detailed cross-validation as
well as test set results.
All leaderboards were last accessed on December 12th, 2019.
33
Figure E.1: Workﬂow for network architecture conﬁguration. a) the conﬁguration of a U-Net
architecture given an input patch size and corresponding voxel spacing. Due to discontinuities in
GPU memory consumption (due to changes in number of pooling operations and thus network depth),
the architecture conﬁguration cannot be solved analytically. b) Conﬁguration of the 3D low resolution
U-Net of the U-Net cascade. The input patch size of the 3D lowres U-Net must cover at least 1/4 of
the median shape of the resampled trainig cases to ensure sufﬁcient contextual information. Higher
resolution axes are downsampled ﬁrst, resulting in a potentially different aspect ratio of the data
relative to the full resolution data. Due to the patch size following this aspect ratio, the network
architecture of the low resolution U-Net may differ from the full resolution U-Net. This requires
reconﬁguration of the network architecture as depicted in a) for each iteration. All computations are
based on memory consumption estimates resulting in fast computation times (sub 1s for conﬁguring
all network architectures).
F.1
Challenge Inclusion Criteria
When selecting challenges for participation, our goal was to apply nnU-Net to as many different
datasets as possible to demonstrate its robustness and ﬂexibility. We applied the following criteria to
ensure a rigorous and sound testing environment:
1. The task of the challenge is semantic segmentation in any 3D imaging modality with images
of any size.
2. Training cases are provided to the challenge participants.
3. Test cases are separate, with the ground truth not being available to the challenge participants.
4. Comparison to results from other participants is possible (e.g. through standardized evalua-
tion with an online platform and a public leaderboard).
34
Figure F.1: Decoding the architecture. We provide all generated architectures in a compact represen-
tation from which they can be fully reconstructed if desired. The architecture displayed here can be
represented by means of kernel sizes [[1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]] and
strides [[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]] (see description in the text).
The competitions outlined below are the ones who qualiﬁed under these criteria and were thus selected
for evaluation of nnU-Net. To our knowledge, CREMI 3 is the only competition from the biological
domain that meets these criteria.
F.2
Compact Architecture Representation
In the following sections, network architectures generated by nnU-Net will be presented in a
compact representation consisting of two lists: one for the convolutional kernel sizes and one for
the downsampling strides. As we describe in this section, this representation can be used to fully
reconstruct the entire network architecture. The condensed representation is chosen to prevent an
excessive amount of ﬁgures.
Figure F.2 exemplary shows the 3D full resolution U-Net for the ACDC dataset (D13).
The architecture has 6 resolution stages. Each resolution stage in both encoder and decoder consists
of two computational blocks. Each block is a sequence of (conv - instance norm - leaky ReLU), as
described in 4. In this ﬁgure, one such block is represented by an outlined blue box. Within each
box, the stride of the convolution is indicated by the ﬁrst three numbers (1,1,1 for the uppermost left
box) and the kernel size of the convolution is indicated by the second set of numbers (1,3,3 for the
uppermost left box). Using this information, along with the template with which our architectures are
designed, we can fully describe the presented architecture with the following lists:
• Convolutional Kernel Sizes: The kernel sizes of this architecture are [[1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]. Note that this list contains 6 elements, matching the
6 resolutions encountered in the encoder. Each element in this list gives the kernel size of
the convolutional layers at this resolution (here this is three digits due to the convolutions
being three dimensional). Within one resolution, both blocks use the same kernel size. The
convolutions in the decoder mirror the encoder (dropping the last entry in the list due to the
bottleneck).
3https://cremi.org/leaderboard/
35
• Downsampling strides: The strides for downsampling here are [[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[1, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]. Each downsampling step in the encoder is represented by one entry. A
stride of 2 results in a downsampling of factor 2 along that axis which a stride of 1 leaves
the size unchanged. Note how the stride initially is [1, 2, 2] due to the spacing discrepancy.
This changes the initial spacing of 5 × 1.56 × 1.56 mm to a spacing of 5 × 3.12 × 3.12 mm
in the second resolution step. The downsampling strides only apply to the ﬁrst convolution
of each resolution stage in the encoder. The second convolution always has a stride of [1,
1, 1]. Again, the decoder mirrors the encoder, but the stride is used as output stride of the
convolution transposed (resulting in appropriate upscaling of feature maps). Outputs of all
convolutions transposed have the same shape as the skip connection originating from the
encoder.
Segmentation outputs for auxiliary losses are added to all but the two lowest resolution steps.
F.3
Medical Segmentation Decathlon
Challenge summary
The Medical Segmentation Decathlon4 [15] is a competition that spans 10
different segmentation tasks. These tasks are selected to cover a large proportion of the dataset
variability in the medical domain. The overarching goal of the competition was to encourage
researchers to develop algorithms that can work with these datasets out of the box without manual
intervention. Each of the tasks comes with respective training and test data. A detailed description of
datasets can be found on the challenge homepage. Originally, the challenge was divided into two
phases: In phase I, 7 datasets were provided to the participants for algorithm development. In phase
II, the algorithms were applied to three additional and previously unseen datasets without further
changes. Challenge evaluation was performed for the two phases individually and winners were
determined based on their performance on the test cases.
Initial version of nnU-Net
A preliminary version of nnU-Net was developed as part
of our entry in this competition, where it achieved the ﬁrst rank in both phases (see
http://medicaldecathlon.com/results.html).
We subsequently made the respective
challenge report available on arXiv [10].
nnU-Net has since been reﬁned using all ten tasks of the Medical Segmentation Decathlon.
The current version of nnU-Net as presented in this publication was again submitted to the open
leaderboard (https://decathlon-10.grand-challenge.org/evaluation/results/), and
achieved the ﬁrst rank outperforming the initial nnU-Net as well as other methods that held the state
of the art since the original competition [17].
Application of nnU-Net to the Medical Segmentation Decathlon
nnU-Net was applied to all ten
tasks of the Medical Segmentation Decathlon without any manual intervention.
BrainTumour (D1)
Normalization: Each image is normalized independently by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation.
4http://medicaldecathlon.com/
36
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 1 x 1
1 x 1 x 1
-
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 169 x 138
138 169 138
-
Patch size:
192 x 160
128 x 128 x 128
-
Batch size:
107
2
-
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
-
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
-
Table F.1: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the BrainTumour dataset from the
Medical Segmentation Decathlon (D1). For more information on how to decode downsampling
strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
edema
non-enhancing tumor
enhancing tumour
mean
2D
0.7957
0.5985
0.7825
0.7256
3D_fullres *
0.8101
0.6199
0.7934
0.7411
Best Ensemble
0.8106
0.6179
0.7926
0.7404
Postprocessed
0.8101
0.6199
0.7934
0.7411
Test set
0.68
0.47
0.68
0.61
Table F.2: Decathlon BrainTumour (D1) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test
set) were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing
model selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see
"Test set") Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform and only
two signiﬁcant digits are reported. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 2D
U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
Heart (D2)
Normalization: Each image is normalized independently by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 1.25 x 1.25
1.37 x 1.25 x 1.25
-
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 320 x 232
115 x 320 x 232
-
Patch size:
320 x 256
80 x 192 x 160
-
Batch size:
40
2
-
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 1]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
-
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], ]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
-
Table F.3: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the Heart dataset from the Medical
Segmentation Decathlon (D2). For more information on how to decode downsampling strides and
kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
37
left atrium
mean
2D
0.9090
0.9090
3D_fullres *
0.9328
0.9328
Best Ensemble
0.9268
0.9268
Postprocessed
0.9329
0.9329
Test set
0.93
0.93
Table F.4: Decathlon Heart (D2) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set)
were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing
model selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see
"Test set"). Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform and only
two signiﬁcant digits are reported. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 2D
U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
Liver (D3)
Normalization: Clip to [−17, 201], then subtract 99.40 and ﬁnally divide by 39.36.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.7676 x 0.7676
1 x 0.7676 x 0.7676
2.47 x 1.90 x 1.90
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 512 x 512
482 x 512 x 512
195 x 207 x 207
Patch size:
512 x 512
128 x 128 x 128
128 x 128 x 128
Batch size:
12
2
2
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
Table F.5: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the Liver dataset from the Medical
Segmentation Decathlon (D3). For more information on how to decode downsampling strides and
kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
liver
cancer
mean
2D
0.9547
0.5637
0.7592
3D_fullres
0.9571
0.6372
0.7971
3D_lowres
0.9563
0.6028
0.7796
3D cascade
0.9600
0.6386
0.7993
Best Ensemble*
0.9613
0.6564
0.8088
Postprocessed
0.9621
0.6600
0.8111
Test set
0.96
0.76
0.86
Table F.6: Decathlon Liver (D3) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set)
were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing
model selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see
"Test set"). Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform and only
two signiﬁcant digits are reported. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 3D low
resolution U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
Hippocampus (D4)
Normalization: Each image is normalized independently by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation.
38
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 1 x 1
1 x 1 x 1
-
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 50 x 35
36 x 50 x 35
-
Patch size:
56 x 40
40 x 56 x 40
-
Batch size:
366
9
-
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
-
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3]]
-
Table F.7: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the Hippocampus dataset from the
Medical Segmentation Decathlon (D4). For more information on how to decode downsampling
strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
Anterior
Posterior
mean
2D
0.8787
0.8595
0.8691
3D_fullres *
0.8975
0.8807
0.8891
Best Ensemble
0.8962
0.8790
0.8876
Postprocessed
0.8975
0.8807
0.8891
Test set
0.90
0.89
0.895
Table F.8: Decathlon Hippocampus (D4) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test
set) were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing
model selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see
"Test set"). Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform and only
two signiﬁcant digits are reported. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 2D
U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
Prostate (D5)
Normalization: Each image is normalized independently by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.62 x 0.62
3.6 x 0.62 x 0.62
-
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 320 x 319
20 x 320 x 319
-
Patch size:
320 x 320
20 x 320 x 256
-
Batch size:
32
2
-
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[1, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
-
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[1, 3, 3], [1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3]]
-
Table F.9: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the Prostate dataset from the Medical
Segmentation Decathlon (D5). For more information on how to decode downsampling strides and
kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
39
PZ
TZ
mean
2D
0.6285
0.8380
0.7333
3D_fullres
0.6663
0.8410
0.7537
Best Ensemble *
0.6611
0.8575
0.7593
Postprocessed
0.6611
0.8577
0.7594
Test set
0.77
0.90
0.835
Table F.10: Decathlon Prostate (D5) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set)
were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing
model selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see
"Test set"). Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform and only
two signiﬁcant digits are reported. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 2D
U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
Lung (D6)
Normalization: Clip to [−1024, 325], then subtract −158.58 and ﬁnally divide by 324.70.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.79 x 0.79
1.24 x 0.79 x 0.79
2.35 x 1.48 x 1.48
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 512 x 512
252 x 512 x 512
133 x 271 x 271
Patch size:
512 x 512
80 x 192 x 160
80 x 192 x 160
Batch size:
12
2
2
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
Table F.11: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the Lung dataset from the Medical
Segmentation Decathlon (D6). For more information on how to decode downsampling strides and
kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
cancer
mean
2D
0.4989
0.4989
3D_fullres
0.7211
0.7211
3D_lowres
0.7109
0.7109
3D cascade
0.6980
0.6980
Best Ensemble*
0.7241
0.7241
Postprocessed
0.7241
0.7241
Test set
0.74
0.74
Table F.12: Decathlon Lung (D6) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set)
were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing
model selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see
"Test set"). Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform and only
two signiﬁcant digits are reported. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 3D low
resolution U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
Pancreas (D7)
Normalization: Clip to [−96.0, 215.0], then subtract 77.99 and ﬁnally divide by 75.40.
40
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.8 x 0.8
2.5 x 0.8 x 0.8
2.58 x 1.29 x 1.29
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 512 x 512
96 x 512 x 512
93 x 318 x 318
Patch size:
512 x 512
40 x 224 x 224
64 x 192 x 192
Batch size:
12
2
2
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
[[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
Table F.13: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the Pancreas dataset from the Medical
Segmentation Decathlon (D7). For more information on how to decode downsampling strides and
kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
pancreas
cancer
mean
2D
0.7738
0.3501
0.5619
3D_fullres
0.8217
0.5274
0.6745
3D_lowres
0.8118
0.5286
0.6702
3D cascade
0.8101
0.5380
0.6741
Best Ensemble *
0.8214
0.5428
0.6821
Postprocessed
0.8214
0.5428
0.6821
Test set
0.82
0.53
0.675
Table F.14: Decathlon Pancreas (D7) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set)
were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing
model selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see
"Test set"). Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform and only
two signiﬁcant digits are reported. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 3D full
resolution U-Net and the 3D U-Net cascade.
Hepatic Vessel (D8)
Normalization: Clip to [−3, 243], then subtract 104.37 and ﬁnally divide by 52.62.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.8 x 0.8
1.5 x 0.8 x 0.8
2.42 x 1.29 x 1.29
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 512 x 512
150 x 512 x 512
93 x 318 x 318
Patch size:
512 x 512
64 x 192 x 192
64 x 192 x 192
Batch size:
12
2
2
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
Table F.15: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the HepaticVessel dataset from the
Medical Segmentation Decathlon (D8). For more information on how to decode downsampling
strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
41
Vessel
Tumour
mean
2D
0.6180
0.6359
0.6269
3D_fullres
0.6456
0.7217
0.6837
3D_lowres
0.6294
0.7079
0.6687
3D cascade
0.6424
0.7138
0.6781
Best Ensemble *
0.6485
0.7250
0.6867
Postprocessed
0.6485
0.7250
0.6867
Test set
0.66
0.72
0.69
Table F.16: Decathlon HepaticVessel (D8) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test
set) were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing
model selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see
"Test set"). Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform and only
two signiﬁcant digits are reported. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 3D full
resolution U-Net and the 3D low resolution U-Net.
Spleen (D9)
Normalization: Clip to [−41, 176], then subtract 99.29 and ﬁnally divide by 39.47.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.79 x 0.79
1.6 x 0.79 x 0.79
2.77 x 1.38 x 1.38
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 512 x 512
187 x 512 x 512
108 x 293 x 293
Patch size:
512 x 512
64 x 192 x 160
64 x 192 x 192
Batch size:
12
2
2
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
Table F.17: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the Spleen dataset from the Medical
Segmentation Decathlon (D9). For more information on how to decode downsampling strides and
kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
spleen
mean
2D
0.9492
0.9492
3D_fullres
0.9638
0.9638
3D_lowres
0.9683
0.9683
3D cascade
0.9714
0.9714
Best Ensemble *
0.9723
0.9723
Postprocessed
0.9724
0.9724
Test set
0.97
0.97
Table F.18: Decathlon Spleen (D9) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set)
were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing
model selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see
"Test set"). Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform and only
two signiﬁcant digits are reported. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 3D
U-Net cascade and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
Colon (D10)
Normalization: Clip to [−30.0, 165.82], then subtract 62.18 and ﬁnally divide by 32.65.
42
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.78 x 0.78
3 x 0.78 x 0.78
3.09 x 1.55 x 1.55
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 512 x 512
150 x 512 x 512
146 x 258 x 258
Patch size:
512 x 512
56 x 192 x 160
96 x 160 x 160
Batch size:
12
2
2
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
Table F.19: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the Colon dataset from the Medical
Segmentation Decathlon (D10). For more information on how to decode downsampling strides and
kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
colon cancer primaries
mean
2D
0.2852
0.2852
3D_fullres
0.4553
0.4553
3D_lowres
0.4538
0.4538
3D cascade *
0.4937
0.4937
Best Ensemble
0.4853
0.4853
Postprocessed
0.4937
0.4937
Test set
0.58
0.58
Table F.20: Decathlon Colon (D10) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set)
were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing
model selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see
"Test set"). Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform and only
two signiﬁcant digits are reported. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 3D
U-Net cascade and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
F.4
Multi Atlas Labeling Beyond the Cranial Vault: Abdomen (D11)
Challenge summary
The Multi Atlas Labeling Beyond the Cranial Vault - Abdomen Challenge5
[12] (denoted BCV for brevity) comprises 30 CT images for training and 20 for testing. The
segmentation target are thirteen different organs in the abdomen.
Application of nnU-Net to BCV
nnU-Net was applied to the BCV challenge without any manual
intervention.
Normalization: Clip to [−958, 327], then subtract 82.92 and ﬁnally divide by 136.97.
5https://www.synapse.org/Synapse:syn3193805/wiki/217752
43
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.76 x 0.76
3 x 0.76 x 0.76
3.18 x 1.60 x 1.60
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 512 x 512
148 x 512 x 512
140 x 243 x 243
Patch size:
512 x 512
48 x 192 x 192
80 x 160 x 160
Batch size:
12
2
2
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
Table F.21: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the BCV challenge (D131. For more
information on how to decode downsampling strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2D
0.8860
0.8131
0.8357
0.6406
0.7724
0.9453
0.8405
0.9128
3D_fullres
0.9083
0.8939
0.8675
0.6632
0.7840
0.9557
0.8816
0.9229
3D_lowres
0.9132
0.9045
0.9132
0.6525
0.7810
0.9554
0.8903
0.9209
3D cascade
0.9166
0.9069
0.9137
0.7036
0.7885
0.9587
0.9037
0.9215
Best Ensemble *
0.9135
0.9065
0.8971
0.6955
0.7897
0.9589
0.9026
0.9248
Postprocessed
0.9135
0.9065
0.8971
0.6959
0.7897
0.9590
0.9026
0.9248
Test set
0.9721
0.9182
0.9578
0.7528
0.8411
0.9769
0.9220
0.9290
9
10
11
12
13
mean
2D
0.8140
0.7046
0.7367
0.6269
0.5909
0.7784
3D_fullres
0.8638
0.7659
0.8176
0.7148
0.7238
0.8279
3D_lowres
0.8571
0.7469
0.8003
0.6688
0.6851
0.8223
3D cascade
0.8621
0.7722
0.8210
0.7205
0.7214
0.8393
Best Ensemble *
0.8673
0.7746
0.8299
0.7218
0.7287
0.8393
Postprocessed
0.8673
0.7746
0.8299
0.7262
0.7290
0.8397
Test set
0.8809
0.8317
0.8515
0.7887
0.7674
0.8762
Table F.22: Multi Atlas Labeling Beyond the Cranial Vault Abdomen (D11) results. Note that all
reported Dice scores (except the test set) were computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training
cases. Postprocessing was applied to the model marked with *. This model (incl postprocessing) was
used for test set predictions. Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online
platform. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 3D U-Net cascade and the 3D
full resolution U-Net.
F.5
PROMISE12 (D12)
Challenge summary
The segmentation target of the PROMISE12 challenge [13] is the prostate in
T2 MRI images. 50 training cases with prostate annotations are provided for training. There are 30
test cases which need to be segmented by the challenge participants and are subsequently evaluated
on an online platform6.
Application of nnU-Net to PROMISE12
nnU-Net was applied to the PROMISE12 challenge
without any manual intervention.
Normalization: Each image is normalized independently by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation.
6https://promise12.grand-challenge.org/
44
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.61 x 0.61
2.2 x 0.61 x 0.61
-
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 327 x 327
39 x 327 x 327
-
Patch size:
384 x 384
28 x 256 x 256
-
Batch size:
22
2
-
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[1, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
-
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
-
Table F.23: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the PROMISE12 challenge (D12). For
more information on how to decode downsampling strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see
F.2
prostate
mean
2D
0.8932
0.8932
3D_fullres
0.8891
0.8891
Best Ensemble *
0.9029
0.9029
Postprocessed
0.9030
0.9030
Test set
0.9194
0.9194
Table F.24: PROMISE12 (D12) results. Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set) were
computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing model
selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see "Test set").
Note that the scores for the test set are computed with the online platform. The evaluation score of our
test set submission is 89.6507. The test set Dice score reported in the table was computed from the de-
tailed submission results (Detailed results available here https://promise12.grand-challenge.
org/evaluation/results/89044a85-6c13-49f4-9742-dea65013e971/). Best ensemble on
this dataset was the combination of the 2D U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
F.6
The Automatic Cardiac Diagnosis Challenge (ACDC) (D13)
Challenge summary
The Automatic Cardiac Diagnosis Challenge7 [1] (ACDC) comprises 100
training patients and 50 test patients. The target structures are the cavity of the right ventricle,
the myocardium of the left ventricle and the cavity of the left ventricle. All images are cine MRI
sequences of which the enddiastolic (ED) and endsystolic (ES) time points of the cardiac cycle were
to be segmented. With two time instances per patient, the effective number of training/test images is
200/100.
Application of nnU-Net to ACDC
Since two time instances of the same patient were provided,
we manually interfered with the split for the 5-fold cross-validation of our models to ensure mutual
exclusivity of patients between folds. A part from that, nnU-Net was applied without manual
intervention.
Normalization: Each image is normalized independently by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation.
7https://acdc.creatis.insa-lyon.fr
45
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 1.56 x 1.56
5 x 1.56 x 1.56
-
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 237 x 208
18 x 237 x 208
-
Patch size:
256 x 224
20 x 256 x 224
-
Batch size:
58
3
-
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2]]
[[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[1, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
-
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
-
Table F.25: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the ACDC challenge (D13). For more
information on how to decode downsampling strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
RV
MLV
LVC
mean
2D
0.9053
0.8991
0.9433
0.9159
3D_fullres
0.9059
0.9022
0.9458
0.9179
Best Ensemble *
0.9145
0.9059
0.9479
0.9227
Postprocessed
0.9145
0.9059
0.9479
0.9228
Test set
0.9295
0.9183
0.9407
0.9295
Table F.26: ACDC results (D13). Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set) were
computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing model
selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see "Test set").
Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform. The online platform
reports the Dice scores for enddiastolic and endsystolic time points separately. We averaged these
values for a more condensed presentation. Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the
2D U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
F.7
Liver and Liver Tumor Segmentation Challenge (LiTS) (D14)
Challenge summary
The Liver and Liver Tumor Segmentation challenge [3] provides 131 training
CT images with ground truth annotations for the liver and liver tumors. 70 test images are provided
without annotations. The predicted segmentation masks of the test cases are evaluated using the LiTS
online platform8.
Application of nnU-Net to LiTS
nnU-Net was applied to the LiTS challenge without any manual
intervention.
Normalization: Clip to [−17, 201], then subtract 99.40 and ﬁnally divide by 39.39.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.77 x 0.77
1 x 0.77 x 0.77
2.47 x 1.90 x 1.90
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 512 x 512
482 x 512 x 512
195 x 207 x 207
Patch size:
512 x 512
128 x 128 x 128
128 x 128 x 128
Batch size:
12
2
2
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
Table F.27: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the LiTS challenge (D14). For more
information on how to decode downsampling strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
8https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/17094
46
liver
cancer
mean
2D
0.9547
0.5603
0.7575
3D_fullres
0.9576
0.6253
0.7914
3D_lowres
0.9585
0.6161
0.7873
3D cascade
0.9609
0.6294
0.7951
Best Ensemble*
0.9618
0.6539
0.8078
Postprocessed
0.9631
0.6543
0.8087
Test set
0.9670
0.7630
0.8650
Table F.28: LiTS results (D14). Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set) were computed
using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing model selected for
subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see "Test set"). Note that
the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform. Best ensemble on this dataset
was the combination of the 3D low resolution U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
F.8
Longitudinal multiple sclerosis lesion segmentation challenge (MSLesion) (D15)
Challenge summary
The longitudinal multiple sclerosis lesion segmentation challenge [4] pro-
vides 5 training patients. For each patient, 4 to 5 images acquired at different time points are provided
(4 patients with 4 time points each and one patient with 5 time points for a total of 21 images).
Each time point is annotated by two different experts, resulting in 42 training annotations (on 21
images). The test set contains 14 patients, again with several time points each, for a total of 61 MRI
acquisitions. Test set predictions are evaluated using the online platform9. Each train and test image
consists of four MRI modalities: MPRAGE, FLAIR, Proton Density, T2.
Application of nnU-Net to MSLesion
We manually interfere with the splits in the cross-validation
to ensure mutual exclusivity of patients between folds. Each image was annotated by two different
experts. We treat these annotations as separate training images (of the same patient), resulting in a
training set size of 2 × 21 = 42. We do not use the longitudinal nature of the scans and treat each
image individually during training and inference.
Normalization: Each image is normalized independently by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 1 x 1
1 x 1 x 1
-
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 180 x 137
137 x 180 x 137
-
Patch size:
192 x 160
112 x 128 x 96
-
Batch size:
107
2
-
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2]]
[[1, 2, 1], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
-
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
-
Table F.29: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the MSLesion challenge (D15). For
more information on how to decode downsampling strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see
F.2
9https://smart-stats-tools.org/lesion-challenge
47
lesion
mean
2D
0.7339
0.7339
3D_fullres *
0.7531
0.7531
Best Ensemble
0.7494
0.7494
Postprocessed
0.7531
0.7531
Test set
0.6785
0.6785
Table F.30: MSLesion results (D15). Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set) were
computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. * marks the best performing model
selected for subsequent postprocessing (see "Postprocessed") and test set submission (see "Test
set"). Note that the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform based on the
detailed results (which are available here https://smart-stats-tools.org/sites/lesion_
challenge/temp/top25/nnUNetV2_12032019_0903.csv). The ranking is based on a score,
which includes other metrics as well (see [4] for details). The score of our submission is 92.874. Best
ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 2D U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
F.9
Combined Healthy Abdominal Organ Segmentation (CHAOS) (D16)
Challenge summary
The CHAOS challenge [11] is divided into ﬁve tasks. Here we focused on
Tasks 3 (MRI Liver segmentation) and Task 5 (MRI multiorgan segmentation). Tasks 1, 2 and 4 also
included the use of CT images, a modality for which plenty of public data is available (see e.g. BCV
and LiTS challenge). To isolate the algorithmic performance of nnU-Net relative to other participants
we decided to only use the tasks for which a contamination with external data was unlikely. The target
structures of Task 5 are the liver, the spleen and the left and right kidneys. The CHAOS challenge
provides 20 training cases. For each training case, there is a T2 images with a corresponding ground
truth annotation as well as a T1 acquisition with its own, separate ground truth annotation. The T1
acquisition has two modalities which are co-registered: T1 in-phase and T1 out-phase. Task 3 is a
subset of Task 5 with only the liver being the segmentation target. The 20 test cases are evaluated
using the online platform10.
Application of nnU-Net to CHAOS
nnU-Net only supports images with a constant number of
input modalities. The training cases in CHAOS have either one (T2) or two (T1 in & out phase)
modalities. To ensure compatibility with nnU-Net we could have either duplicated the T2 image and
trained with two input modalities or use only one input modality and treat T1 in phase and out phase
as separate training examples. We opted for the latter because this variant results in more (albeit
highly correlated) training images. With 20 training patients being provided, this approach resulted
in 60 training images. For the cross-validation we ensure that the split is being done on patient level.
During inference, nnU-Net will generate two separate predictions for T1 in and out phase which
need to be consolidated for test set evaluation. We achieve this by simply averaging the softmax
probabilities between the two to generate the ﬁnal segmentation. We train nnU-Net only for Task 5.
Because task 3 represents a subset of Task 5, we extract the liver from our Task 5 predictions and
submit it to Task 3.
Normalization: Each image is normalized independently by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation.
10https://chaos.grand-challenge.org/
48
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 1.66 x 1.66
5.95 x 1.66 x 1.66
-
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 195 x 262
45 x 195 x 262
-
Patch size:
224 x 320
40 x 192 x 256
-
Batch size:
45
2
-
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [1, 2]]
[[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2], [1, 1, 2]]
-
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3]]
-
Table F.31: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the CHAOS challenge (D16). For more
information on how to decode downsampling strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2.
liver
right kidney
left kidney
spleen
mean
2D
0.9132
0.8991
0.8897
0.8720
0.8935
3D_fullres
0.9202
0.9274
0.9209
0.8938
0.9156
Best Ensemble *
0.9184
0.9283
0.9255
0.8911
0.9158
Postprocessed
0.9345
0.9289
0.9212
0.894
0.9197
Test set
-
-
-
-
-
Table F.32: CHAOS results (D16). Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set) were
computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. Postprocessing was applied to the
model marked with *. This model (incl postprocessing) was used for test set predictions. Note that
the evaluation of the test set was performed with the online platform of the challenge which does not
report Dice scores for the individual organs. The score of our submission was 72.44 for Task 5 and
75.10 for Task3 (see [11] for details). Best ensemble on this dataset was the combination of the 2D
U-Net and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
F.10
Kidney and Kidney Tumor Segmentation (KiTS) (D17)
Challenge summary
The Kidney and Kidney Tumor Segmentation challenge [8] was the largest
competition (in terms of number of participants) at MICCAI 2019. The target structures are the
kidneys and kidney tumors. 210 training and 90 test cases are provided by the challenge organizers.
The organizers provide the data both in their original geometry (with voxel spacing varying between
cases) as well as interpolated to a common voxel spacing. Evaluation of the test set predictions is
done on the online platform11.
We participated in the original KiTS 2019 MICCAI challenge with a manually designed
residual 3D U-Net. This algorithm, described in [9] obtained the ﬁrst rank in the challenge. For this
submission, we did slight modiﬁcations to the original training data: Cases 15 and 37 were conﬁrmed
to be faulty by the challenge organizers (https://github.com/neheller/kits19/issues/21)
which is why we replaced their respective segmentation masks with predictions of one of our
networks. We furthermore excluded cases 23, 68, 125 and 133 because we suspected labeling
errors in these cases as well. At the time of conducting the experiments for this publication, no
revised segmentation masks were provided by the challenge organizers, which is why we re-used the
modiﬁed training dataset for training nnU-Net.
After the challenge event at MICCAI 2019, an open leaderboard was created.
The original
11https://kits19.grand-challenge.org/
49
challenge leaderboard is retained at http://results.kits-challenge.org/miccai2019/. All
submissions of the original KiTS challenge were mirrored to the open leaderboard. The submission
of nnU-Net as performed in the context of this manuscript is done on the open leaderboard, where
many more competitors have entered since the challenge. As presented in Figure 3, nnU-Net sets a
new state of the art on the open leaderboard, thus also outperforming our initial, manually optimized
solution.
Application of nnU-Net to KiTS
Since nnU-Net is designed to automatically deal with varying
voxel spacings within a dataset, we chose the original, non-interpolated image data as provided by
the organizers and let nnU-Net deal with the homogenization of voxel spacing. nnU-Net was applied
to the KiTS challenge without any manual intervention.
Normalization: Clip to [−79, 304], then subtract 100.93 and ﬁnally divide by 76.90.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.78 x 0.78
0.78 x 0.78 x 0.78
1.99 x 1.99 x 1.99
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 512 x 512
525 x 512 x 512
206 x 201 x 201
Patch size:
512 x 512
128 x 128 x 128
128 x 128 x 128
Batch size:
12
2
2
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
Table F.33: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the KiTS challenge (D17). For more
information on how to decode downsampling strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
Kidney
Tumor
mean
2D
0.9613
0.7563
0.8588
3D_fullres
0.9702
0.8367
0.9035
3D_lowres
0.9629
0.8420
0.9025
3D cascade
0.9702
0.8546
0.9124
Best Ensemble*
0.9707
0.8620
0.9163
Postprocessed
0.9707
0.8620
0.9163
Test set
-
0.8542
-
Table F.34: KiTS results (D17). Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set) were computed
using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. Postprocessing was applied to the model marked
with *. This model (incl postprocessing) was used for test set predictions. Note that the Dice scores
for the test set are computed with the online platform which computes the kidney Dice score based of
the union of the kidney and tumor labels whereas nnU-Net always evaluates labels independently,
resulting in a missing value for kindey in the table. The reported kindey Dice by the platform (which
is not comparable with the value computed by nnU-Net) is 0.9793. Best ensemble on this dataset was
the combination of the 3D U-Net cascade and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
F.11
Segmentation of THoracic Organs at Risk in CT images (SegTHOR) (D18)
Challenge summary
In the Segmentation of THoracic Organs at Risk in CT images [16] challenge,
four abdominal organs (the heart, the aorta, the trachea and the esopahgus) are to be segmented in CT
50
images. 40 training images are provided for training and another 20 images are provided for testing.
Evaluation of the test images is done using the online platform12.
Application of nnU-Net to SegTHOR
nnU-Net was applied to the SegTHOR challenge without
any manual intervention.
Normalization: Clip to [−986, 271], then subtract 20.78 and ﬁnally divide by 180.50.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
NA x 0.89 x 0.89
2.50 x 0.89 x 0.89
3.51 x 1.76 x 1.76
Median image shape at
target spacing:
NA x 512 x 512
171 x 512 x 512
122 x 285 x 285
Patch size:
512 x 512
64 x 192 x 160
80 x 192 x 160
Batch size:
12
2
2
Downsampling strides:
[[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2],
[2, 2], [2, 2], [2, 2]]
[[1, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2]]
[[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
Convolution kernel sizes:
[[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3],
[3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3], [3, 3]]
[[1, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
[[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3]]
Table F.35: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the SegTHOR challenge (D18). For
more information on how to decode downsampling strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see
F.2
esophagus
heart
trachea
aorta
mean
2D
0.8181
0.9407
0.9077
0.9277
0.8986
3D_fullres
0.8495
0.9527
0.9055
0.9426
0.9126
3D_lowres
0.8110
0.9464
0.8930
0.9284
0.8947
3D cascade
0.8553
0.9520
0.9045
0.9403
0.9130
Best Ensemble*
0.8545
0.9532
0.9066
0.9427
0.9143
Postprocessed
0.8545
0.9532
0.9083
0.9438
0.9150
Test set
0.8890
0.9570
0.9228
0.9510
0.9300
Table F.36: SegTHOR results (D18). Note that all reported Dice scores (except the test set) were
computed using ﬁve fold cross-validation on the training cases. Postprocessing was applied to the
model marked with *. This model (incl postprocessing) was used for test set predictions. Note that
the Dice scores for the test set are computed with the online platform. Best ensemble on this dataset
was the combination of the 3D U-Net cascade and the 3D full resolution U-Net.
F.12
Challenge on Circuit Reconstruction from Electron Microscopy Images (CREMI)
(D19)
Challenge summary
The Challenge on Circuit Reconstruction from Electron Microscopy Images
is subdivided into three tasks. The synaptic cleft segmentation task can be formulated as semantic
segmentation (as opposed to e.g. instance segmentation) and is thus compatible with nnU-Net. In this
task, the segmentation target is the cell membrane in locations where the cells are forming a synapse.
The dataset consists of serial section Transmission Electron Microscopy scans of the Drosophila
melanogaster brain. Three volumes are provided for training and another three are provided for
testing. Test set evaluation is done using the online platform13.
Application of nnU-Net to CREMI
Since to the number of training images is lower than the
number of splits, we cannot run a 5-fold cross-validation. Thus, we trained 5 model instances,
12https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/21145
13https://cremi.org/
51
each of them on all three training volumes and subsequently ensembled these models for test set
prediction. Because this training scheme leaves no validation data, selection of the best of three
model conﬁgurations as performed by nnU-Net after cross-validation was not possible. Hence, we
intervened by only conﬁguring and training the 3D full resolution conﬁguration.
Normalization: Each image is normalized independently by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation.
2D U-Net
3D full resolution U-Net
3D low resolution U-Net
Target spacing (mm):
-
40 x 4 x 4
-
Median image shape at
target spacing:
-
125 x 1250 x 1250
-
Patch size:
-
24 x 256 x256
-
Batch size:
-
2
-
Downsampling strides:
-
[[1, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2],
[2, 2, 2], [2, 2, 2], [1, 2, 2]]
-
Convolution kernel sizes:
-
[[1, 3, 3], [1, 3, 3], [1, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3], [3, 3, 3],
[3, 3, 3]]
-
Table F.37: Network conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net for the CREMI challenge (D19). For more
information on how to decode downsampling strides and kernel sizes into an architecture, see F.2
Results
Because our training scheme for this challenge left no validation data, a performance
estimate as given for the other datastes is not available for CREMI. The CREMI test set is evaluated
by the online platform. The evaluation metric is the so called CREMI score, a description of which is
available here https://cremi.org/metrics/. Dice scores for the test set are not reported. The
CREMI score of our test set submission was 74.96 (lower is better).
G
Using nnU-Net with limited compute resources
Reduction of computational complexity was one of the key motivations driving the design of nnU-Net.
The effort of running all the conﬁgurations generated by nnU-Net should be manageable for most
users and researchers. There are, however, some shortcuts that can be be taken in case computational
resources are extremely scarce.
G.1
Reducing the number of network trainings
Depending on whether the 3D U-Net cascade is conﬁgured for a given dataset, nnU-Net requires 10
(2D and 3D U-Net with 5 models each) or 20 (2d, 3D, 3D cascade (low resolution and high resolution
U-Net) with 5 models each) U-Net trainings to run, each of which takes a couple of days on a single
GPU. While this approach guarantees the best possible performance, training all models may exceed
reasonable computation time if only a single GPU is available. Therefore, we present two strategies
to reduce the number of total network trainings when running nnU-Net.
Manual selection of U-Net conﬁgurations
Overall, the 3D full resolution U-Net shows the best segmentation results. Thus, this conﬁguration is
a good starting point and could simply be selected as default choice. Users can decide whether to train
this conﬁguration using all training cases (to train a single model) or run a ﬁve-fold cross-validation
and ensemble the 5 resulting models for test case predictions.
In some scenarios, other conﬁgurations than the 3D full resolution U-Net can yield best
52
performance. Identifying such scenarios and selecting the respective most promising conﬁguration,
however, requires domain knowledge for the dataset at hand. Datasets with highly anisotropic images
(such as D12 PROMISE12), for instance, could be best suited for running a 2D U-Net. There is,
however, no guarantee for this relation (see D13 ACDC). On datasets with very large images, the
3D U-Net cascade seems to marginally outperform the 3D full resolution U-Net (for example D11,
D14, D17, D18, ...) because it improves the capture of contextual information. Note that this is only
true if the target structure requires a large receptive ﬁeld for optimal recognition. On CREMI (D19)
for example, despite large image sizes, only a limited ﬁeld of view is required, because the target
structure are relatively small synapses that can be identiﬁed using only local information, which is
why we selected the 3D full resolution U-Net for this dataset (see Section F.12).
Not running all conﬁgurations as 5-fold cross-validation
Another computation shortcut is to not run all models as 5-fold cross-validation. For instance, only
one split for each conﬁguration can be run (note, however, that the 3D low resolution U-Net of
the cascade is required to be run as a 5-fold cross-validation in order to generate low resolution
segmentation maps of all training cases for the second full resolution U-net of the cascade). Even
when running multiple conﬁgurations to rely on empirical selection of conﬁgurations by nnU-Net,
this reduces the total number of models to be trained to 2 if no cascade is conﬁgured or 8 if the
cascade is conﬁgured (the cascade requires 6 model trainings: 5 3D low resolution U-Nets and 1 full
resolution 3D U-Net training). nnU-Net subsequently bases selection of the best conﬁguration on this
single train-val split. Note that this strategy provides less reliable performance estimates and may
result in sub optimal conﬁguration choices. Finally, users can decide whether they wish to re-train the
selected conﬁguration on the entire training data or run a ﬁve-fold cross-validation for this selected
conﬁguration. The latter is expected to result in better test set performance because the 5 models can
be used as an ensemble.
G.2
Reduction of GPU memory
nnU-Net is conﬁgured to utilize 11GB of GPU memory. This requirement is, based on our experience,
a realistic requirement for a modern deep-learning capable GPU (such as a Nvidia GTX 1080 ti
(11GB), Nvidia RTX 2080 ti (11GB), Nvidia TitanX(p) (12GB), Nvidia P100 (12/16 GB), Nvidia
Titan RTX (24GB), Nvidia V100 (16/32 GB), ...). We strongly recommend using nnU-Net with
this default conﬁguration, because it has been tested extensively and, as we show in this manuscript,
provides excellent segmentation accuracy. Should users still desire to run nnU-Net on a smaller GPU,
the amount of GPU memory used for network conﬁguration can be adapted easily. Corresponding
instructions are provided along with the source code.
References
[1] O. Bernard, A. Lalande, C. Zotti, F. Cervenansky, X. Yang, P.-A. Heng, I. Cetin, K. Lekadir,
O. Camara, M. A. G. Ballester, et al. Deep learning techniques for automatic mri cardiac multi-
structures segmentation and diagnosis: Is the problem solved? IEEE TMI, 37(11):2514–2525,
2018.
[2] P. Bilic, P. F. Christ, E. Vorontsov, G. Chlebus, H. Chen, Q. Dou, C.-W. Fu, X. Han, P.-
A. Heng, J. Hesser, et al. The liver tumor segmentation benchmark (lits). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.04056ada, 2019.
53
[3] P. Bilic, P. F. Christ, E. Vorontsov, G. Chlebus, H. Chen, Q. Dou, C.-W. Fu, X. Han, P.-A. Heng,
J. Hesser, et al. The liver tumor segmentation benchmark (lits). arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04056,
2019.
[4] A. Carass, S. Roy, A. Jog, J. L. Cuzzocreo, E. Magrath, A. Gherman, J. Button, J. Nguyen,
F. Prados, C. H. Sudre, et al. Longitudinal multiple sclerosis lesion segmentation: resource and
challenge. NeuroImage, 148:77–102, 2017.
[5] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille. Deeplab: Semantic
image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs.
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 40(4):834–848, 2017.
[6] L. Heinrich, J. Funke, C. Pape, J. Nunez-Iglesias, and S. Saalfeld. Synaptic cleft segmentation
in non-isotropic volume electron microscopy of the complete drosophila brain. In International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pages 317–325.
Springer, 2018.
[7] N. Heller, F. Isensee, K. H. Maier-Hein, X. Hou, C. Xie, F. Li, Y. Nan, G. Mu, Z. Lin, M. Han,
et al. The state of the art in kidney and kidney tumor segmentation in contrast-enhanced ct
imaging: Results of the kits19 challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01054, 2019.
[8] N. Heller, N. Sathianathen, A. Kalapara, E. Walczak, K. Moore, H. Kaluzniak, J. Rosen-
berg, P. Blake, Z. Rengel, M. Oestreich, et al. The kits19 challenge data: 300 kidney tumor
cases with clinical context, ct semantic segmentations, and surgical outcomes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.00445, 2019.
[9] F. Isensee and K. H. Maier-Hein.
An attempt at beating the 3d u-net.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.02182, 2019.
[10] F. Isensee, J. Petersen, A. Klein, D. Zimmerer, P. F. Jaeger, S. Kohl, J. Wasserthal, G. Koehler,
T. Norajitra, S. Wirkert, et al. nnu-net: Self-adapting framework for u-net-based medical image
segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10486, 2018.
[11] A. E. Kavur, N. S. Gezer, M. Barı¸s, P.-H. Conze, V. Groza, D. D. Pham, S. Chatterjee, P. Ernst,
S. Özkan, B. Baydar, et al. Chaos challenge–combined (ct-mr) healthy abdominal organ
segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.06535, 2020.
[12] B. Landman, Z. Xu, J. Eugenio Igelsias, M. Styner, T. Langerak, and A. Klein. Miccai
multi-atlas labeling beyond the cranial vault–workshop and challenge, 2015.
[13] G. Litjens, R. Toth, W. van de Ven, C. Hoeks, S. Kerkstra, B. van Ginneken, G. Vincent,
G. Guillard, N. Birbeck, J. Zhang, et al. Evaluation of prostate segmentation algorithms for mri:
the promise12 challenge. Med Image Analysis, 18(2):359–373, 2014.
[14] B. H. Menze, A. Jakab, S. Bauer, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, K. Farahani, J. Kirby, Y. Burren, N. Porz,
J. Slotboom, R. Wiest, et al. The multimodal brain tumor image segmentation benchmark
(brats). IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 34(10):1993–2024, 2014.
[15] A. L. Simpson, M. Antonelli, S. Bakas, M. Bilello, K. Farahani, B. van Ginneken, A. Kopp-
Schneider, B. A. Landman, G. Litjens, B. Menze, et al. A large annotated medical image dataset
for the development and evaluation of segmentation algorithmsdelldatagrowth. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.09063, 2019.
54
[16] R. Trullo, C. Petitjean, B. Dubray, and S. Ruan. Multiorgan segmentation using distance-aware
adversarial networks. Journal of Medical Imaging, 6(1):014001, 2019.
[17] Q. Yu, D. Yang, H. Roth, Y. Bai, Y. Zhang, A. L. Yuille, and D. Xu. C2fnas: Coarse-to-ﬁne
neural architecture search for 3d medical image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.09628,
2019.
55
